 This paper describes a digital teaching application that approaches the study of language and literary works from a social semiotic perspective and represents an innovative pedagogical model for world language and literature classes. The Golden Age Literature Glossary Online, known by the acronym GALGO, consists of an online glossary of select keywords, from canonical texts of Golden Age Spanish literature, whose multiple connotations illuminate important linguistic and social concepts of the 16th and 17th centuries. GALGO incorporates British cultural historian Raymond Williams’ methodology in his Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society: namely, identifying problem-laden words or keywords, charting their distinct usages across texts, and reflecting critically on clusters of associated words. GALGO seeks to instantiate language as social semiotic by linking the semantic configurations of a literary work simultaneously to the cultural environment, the linguistic system, and the social system. Applying the conceptual design of M.A.K. Halliday’s social semiotic model, GALGO’s interpretive apparatus provides the field of discourse or context of situation for the text in which a specific keyword appears. The field of discourse presents clusters, word groupings of semiotic affinity that describe the social action that is taking place in the text. GALGO also performs an interpretation of the tenor of discourse, highlighting sociological variables connected to class status, gender role and racial category that refine a keyword’s meaning from the perspective of interpersonal relationships. Finally, GALGO adds commentary on discursive structures, such as patterns of grammar, syntactic nuances, and figurative language, that surround the keyword in the text. GALGO’s strength resides in the synchronic connectivity that the system facilitates when identifying the constellation of meanings for any given keyword. From a technical perspective, the system has the ability to efficiently identify the absolute position of all uses of a keyword across multiple texts, so that large texts can be managed and search times minimized for both users and system administrators. GALGO is constructed in such a way that users can not only access existing analysis within the database, but also can assume, when instructed to do so, the role of the system administrator and contribute their own annotations. A team of faculty and student administrators are currently building the database with research previously collected in Spanish Golden Age literature seminars. Providence College students have utilized the social semiotic methodology underlying GALGO for several years now with successful outcomes both in terms of their growth as language majors and critical thinkers. 