 In this paper, I extend theoretical understandings of the gaming activity and literary form called the quest and its relationship to issues of interpretation, focusing primarily on game theory with concrete examples as well as some broadly applicable pedagogical uses of these ideas in literature classrooms. The argument contributes to a recent theoretical and practical discussion of quests by scholars of games studies such as Aarseth 2004, Juul 2005, Tosca 2003, and Tronstad 2001. I build upon and revise these theorists’ understandings by approaching a “quest” as a goal-oriented activity in which players undertake a journey in search of meaning. By demonstrating similarities between the literary traditions in which quests are central and the practice of digital game design, I argue that quests can be better understood theoretically and more productively used in the classroom if meaning and action are regarded as complementary design principles instead of conflicting impulses. A revised understanding of quests can help to mediate between games and narratives by showing strategies by which game designers have created meaningful action, often in ways that are either unconsciously similar to or inspired by the literary traditions of mythology, epic, and romance. Specifically, game designers can use level design to create labyrinthine spaces that encode thematic implications, in the tradition of literary allegory. If these symbolic spaces are coordinated with significant obstacles and challenges, the apparent conflict between meaning and action can be resolved through engaging gameplay that allows players to enact a range of thematic ideas, contributing to the ongoing replay value of a digital game. I also suggest ways in which this understanding of quests can allow literature teachers to plan assignments where students transform literary narratives into interpretative quests taking the form of digital games. As a paradigmatic example, I describe one such assignment, in which my students adapted episodes from Pynchon’s The Crying of Lot 49 into design documents and prototypes, and I suggest some theoretical implications of its results for other instructors. By adapting works of literature into quests, students learn to discover and create meaning through the active exertion of cognitive and imaginative effort rather than absorbing it passively. 