The DATABASE OF ELECTRONIC TEXTS of the LEXICON OF BAVARIAN DIALECTS IN AUSTRIA (WBÖ) (TEXTKORPUS zum WBÖ)—The Lexicon of Bavarian Dialects in Austria (Wörterbuch der bairischen Mundarten in Österrreich [WBÖ]) is based on a collection of about 4 million single records. They represent the variety of the regional, social and historical Bavarian dialects. About 10% of all entries are excerpts from texts of various types. The lexicographer has to draw the illustrative quotations from the original texts. The digitized full-texts have been dated and localized, thus each quotation can be placed in time and area enabling the lexicogapher to choose a representative number of examples. For the definitions, the most appropriate and illustrative quotations have to be found, in order to actively support the lexicographer's work, the Institute of Lexicography of Austrian Dialects and Names / Institut für Österreichische Dialekt- und Namenlexika (http://www.oeaw.ac.at/dinamlex) started a new project: the so-called DBÖ (Database of the Bavarian Dialects in Austria / Datenbank der bairischen Mundarten in Österreich), financed by the Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften / Austrian Academy of Sciences. One main database includes the so-called Hauptkatalog, the main archive; there are additional databases which are necessary to retrieve correct information about the questionnaire, the localization of the word and the date of its recording. One component of the DBÖ is the database of electronic texts of the WBÖ, including some 90 Austrian texts spanning several centuries, representing the Austrian dialects. The original texts are scanned using the Austrian OCR-programme proLector V1.20 (A.1) which allows the training of various fonts. The machine-readable texts are converted in TUSTEP (Tübinger System von Textverarbeitungs-Programmen / Tübingen System of Text Processing Programmes). The TUSTEP-files get an alphanumeric key, which allows one to retrieve each quotation from the database in a chronological order and to sort it according to its localization. Finally the texts are broken down into the requisite sized pieces for quoting in the WBÖ-entries. Using a special programme the quotations can easily be reconnected and replaced in the proper context from which they were drawn. The digital texts are a valuable source for the lexicographer freeing him from the monotony of checking over and over again, thus leaving him more time for his proper work, namely the writing of entries for the WBÖ. Furthermore, the digital texts are important for speeding up the dictionary's publication in accordance with the guidelines of the Straffungskonzept 1993 and 1998.