While many digital library initiatives and digital humanities centers still create collection-based projects, they are increasingly looking for ways of federating these collections, enhancing the possibilities of discovery across media and different themed-research. Facilitating access to these objects that are frequently derived from different media and formats, while belonging to different genres, and which have traditionally been described in very different ways, poses challenges that more coherently-themed collections may not. In the last few years it has become increasingly evident to those in the digital humanities and the digital library communities, and the agencies which fund their research, that providing federated searching for the immensely rich digital resources that have been created over the past decade is a high priority. Several recent research grants speak to this issue, such as the Mellon-funded NINES: A Network Funded Initiative for Nineteenth Century Electronic Scholarship , or The Sheet Music Consortium . While digital objects organized around a specific theme or genre typically provide opportunities for rich metadata creation, providing access to diverse collections that seem to have little in common (except that they are owned by the same institution) often poses problems in the compatibility of controlled vocabulary and metadata schema. While this problem has been noticed on much larger scales before and addressed by initiatives such as z39.50 and the Open Archives Initiative’s Protocol for Metadata Harvesting, addressing the problem within a library’s or center’s own digital collections is a vital part of making such initiatives successful by leveraging cross-collection discovery through the internal structure of the metadata scheme as well as a consistent approach to terminology. This presentation will explore the issues surrounding creating an archive of cross-searchable materials across a large spectrum of media, format, and genre at the University of Maryland Libraries . It will examine the way some of these interoperability problems can be addressed through metadata schema, targeted searching, and controlled vocabulary. Description of Research This paper will be based on the research done at the University of Maryland Libraries using two ongoing projects. The first project utilizes The Thomas MacGreevy Archive , a full-text digital repository (following the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines ), to explore the development of metadata and descriptors to facilitate searching across individual collections which are described at different levels of granularity. The second project involves using the knowledge based on the research carried out for the more cohesive MacGreevy Archive for the more diverse repository the UM Library is developing utilizing Fedora as its underlying repository architecture. The Thomas MacGreevy Archive is being explored as a microcosm from which to examine issues of searchability of content divided into collections that cannot be described using a single controlled vocabulary and has different modes of display. The necessity for cross-collection searches has arisen due to the Archive expanding its content from digitized versions of books and articles, to two collections of correspondence (one relatively small collection of seven letters, the other quite large, c 150 letters), and making images that are currently available only via hyperlink from within texts individually discoverable. Preliminary findings involving this research were shared at the joint 2005 ACH/ALLC Conference at University of Victoria. Another issue that the MacGreevy Archive can model is problems of controlled vocabularies across different collections. The current controlled vocabulary descriptors use a faceted approach to describe articles and books written on such topics as art, music, and literature. Since both the correspondence and images differ in form and function from the existing objects in the archive, the current controlled vocabulary descriptors are not granular enough to capture either the variety of themes common to letters, or the additional descriptors to describe what the images are of and about. The experience gained in exploring the more homogenous MacGreevy Archive is being applied to the much more diverse collections and formats being housed in the Fedora repository in which rich collection-specific controlled vocabulary across multiple formats is being developed at the same time as a vocabulary which provides users the opportunity of discovery across all collections. While specific controlled vocabularies exist that would adequately describe each collection, they are generally too specific for materials outside that collection. On the other hand, Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH), while sufficiently broad in scope, are unwieldy in form, taking a post-faceted approach by combining several smaller descriptors into a predefined string. These long strings cause multiple problems in searching (including not being amenable to Boolean searching) but are ubiquitous within university libraries, forming the underlying basis for the vast majority of online catalogues. LCSH descriptors will be necessary, however, for those objects that will occur concurrently in the library catalog. In exploring cross-collection search capabilities in this larger, more diverse environment, the use of controlled vocabulary for subject access is only one possible source of commonalities. Within the Fedora repository, the University of Maryland Libraries will create a metadata scheme that represents a hybrid of the elements and concepts chiefly found in qualified Dublin Core , and the Visual Resources Association Core < http://www.vraweb.org/vracore3.htm >. This scheme and hybrid approach was first used by the University of Virginia, and the UM Libraries is refining that element set and list of required elements specifically with cross-collection searching in mind. By requiring elements that include information such as the century and geographic focus of individual objects, designers aim to define and render searchable the broader topics that objects from disparate collections of narrow focus may have in common. Designers must also use or define standard vocabularies to be used to populate these broader elements to ensure successful cross-collection discovery. Previous Research The integrated design of online information retrieval systems has been studied most prominently by Marcia Bates (2001). However, most research in this field takes a more atomized approach, focusing solely on one aspect of design: metadata schemes for instance, or GUI design for search screens. Other research has examined the particular needs and searching habits of users, particularly in humanities disciplines, when faced with online search interfaces. Prominent among these has been the work of Deborah Shaw (1995) and the series of reports from the Getty Online Searching Project (Bates, 1994, 1996; Bates et.al. 1993, 1995; Siegfried et.al. 1993). The majority of this research was carried out in the late 1990s and follow-up has been more in specific application of digital library systems than in respect to user-oriented, integrated design, such as Broughton (2001). Another area of inquiry relevant to this research involves the use of faceted classification systems for web-based discovery. The most recent white paper produced by the NINES project neatly summarizes current research (NINES 2005). KM’s ‘The Knowledge Management Connection’ discusses faceted classification within the context of information-intensive business environments. Denton (2003) discusses how to develop a faceted classification scheme, while Bates (1988) surveys the various approaches to subjection description for web-based discovery. Conclusion This paper will build on previous research as mentioned above in the development of a controlled vocabulary, metadata schema, and faceted classification scheme which provides for both rich collection-specific discovery, as well as federated searching across collections.