Based on a consideration of recent editorial criticism concerning issues of marginality, this presentation calls for developing a greater number of hypertext editions of children’s literature. To demonstrate an engagement with and a response to such criticism, this presentation introduces a hypertext edition of the literary tale “The Grey Wolf” by George MacDonald (1871), in which the guiding methodology and digital design, interface, materials, and critical apparatus fit the particular research and educational needs of scholars and students of children’s literature. This presentation proposes that more critical hypertext editions of children’s literature will continue to help reduce scholarly assumptions that dismiss children’s literature as straightforward, transparent, and marginal to the more central concerns of literary criticism. Recent feminist and minority textual studies critics have already identified some of the ways in which editorial and publishing practices reproduce hegemonic and positivist discourses that relegate certain authors and genres to a marginal status in bibliographical and literary studies. For example, feminist critic Ann Thompson argues that the masculinist discourses implicit in editorial conventions have produced critical editions that re-inscribe male-biased assumptions, selections, omissions, and interpretations of texts. Similarly, William Andrews points out that while the literature of minority authors is beginning to appear more frequently in electronic archives and student editions, this editorial work is done in place of developing research-based critical editions for the use of professional academics. But although many kinds of children’s literature infrequently contain textual allusions, challenging language, and references that require annotative explanations, children’s literature scholar Jack Zipes argues that the simplistic narratives and symbolic elements that characterize children’s literature often carry the most potent and subversive political agendas for the very reason that they are considered harmless and transparent. Taking cues from these critics’ awareness of how the elision of marginal voices and texts creates disproportionate literary interpretation, dissemination, and canonization, this presentation considers the dynamic potential of communicating the relatively marginalized genre of children’s literature in critical hypertext editions in ways that would benefit scholars and students. With each new publication of a text that belongs to a “marginal” genre, hypertext critical editions produce what D.C. Greetham describes in Theories of the Text (1993) as the “deferral and dispersion” (5) of the pervasive hierarchical and hegemonic editorial conventions that continue to privilege certain texts, authors, and genres over others. Thus, this presentation aims to demonstrate the theoretical, practical, and pedagogical fit between research strategies in children’s literature studies and the capabilities of hypertext to present and connect visual, contextual, literary and bibliographical material. Because the oral folk tale has no single origin, and because critical work in the area of children’s literature often compares thematics and narrative structures in related historical, national, and transnational texts, hypertext editions of children’s literature can be designed to present multiple versions of narrative material in ways that de-centre traditional editorial principles of “best text” and “authorial intention.” Moreover, critics have recently argued that the editor’s annotations contribute to the (re)production of the text in fundamental ways, further problematizing the notion of “authorial intention.” For example, in discussing some of the methodological issues that the editors faced in creating The Prufrock Papers: A Hypertext Resource for “The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock” (1999), Peter Stoicheff and his colleagues regard the hypertext edition as that which “permits a variety of copy-texts” whose hyperlinks and critical apparatus create “a new kind of interpretive ‘copy-text’.” Feminist editor Brenda Silver further proposes that the adaptation of a text is a form of editorializing that does more than interpret an original text; adaptation, in the author’s view, performs its interpretation. In a related vein, Julia Flanders argues that the xml transformation of the codex text into hypertext necessitates semantic tagging, and that editor’s interpretive annotations combine with the text at the xml level. It follows, then, that any hypertext edition is not only a re-presentation of the author’s text but is itself an adaptation, in which the author’s content and the editor’s presentation of the content join as a single, collaborative performance. Guided by this editorial criticism, then, an annotated hypertext edition of a children’s literary tale would enact the editorial theory that encourages a de-centering and de-privileging of traditional editorial conventions by offering a maximum amount of relational play between textual versions and literary interpretations, of which the hypertext edition itself is one. Not only does the editorial theory concerning issues of marginality encourage a de-centring of versions and authorial intent, but hypertext editions that prescribe to such methodologies can also offer the user diverse interpretive materials for analyzing children’s literature. For example, literary tale scholars often trace the historical development and codification of oral folktales, collate and compare versions, and examine codex editions as cultural artifacts in that they reflect and reproduce political, economic, and moral norms and values. Also, the hypertext edition can offer additional interpretive dimensions to the text by reproducing bibliographical information in digital images, including watermarks and signatures, as well as graphics such as the scripts, borders and illustrations. The hypertext edition can also present audio or visual cinematic adaptations of the literary tale for comparison. Thus, there is immense potential for reproducing children’s literature in hypertext format, particularly since the electronic text may – with hyperlinks, split screens, digital image rendering and audio/visual clips – present a variety of research materials relevant to children’s literature studies that the traditional codex edition could not. In the spirit of Peter Shillingsburg’s assertion that “experimentation and a variety of approaches are to be encouraged” in hypertext edition production, this presentation suggests ways in which the digital transmission of children’s literature de-centres editorial conventions while facilitating scholarly research in this area. To demonstrate this fit between certain editorial theories concerning marginality and adaptation and the practice of studying and comparing textual and literary elements of children’s literature, this presentation introduces a hypertext edition of “The Grey Wolf,” first published in 1871 in a ten-volume set of MacDonald’s work, entitled Works of Fancy and Imagination. This hypertext edition offers different interpretations of the text through colour-coded popup annotations and through the presentation of related texts in a split-frame interface. It also contains an enumerative and analytical bibliography of the 1871 edition, and compares this edition to a paperback edition published by Eerdmans over one hundred years later (1980). Furthermore, this bibliographical component of the edition familiarizes student users with the field of textual studies, and suggests how bibliographical elements may contribute to literary interpretations in meaningful ways. My approach to editing “The Grey Wolf: A Hypertext Edition” is guided by an integrated matrix of textual studies theory and literary criticism, an approach that has been called for by a growing number of textual studies and literary critics, such as Michael Groden and Marie-Laure Ryan. This approach also draws attention to the issues of marginality, versioning and the hypertext apparatus through which the text is mediated, as well as how this remediation inevitably influences the reception and interpretation of the text.