Introduction This proposal reports on a research project exploring the nature of research teams in the Digital Humanities community. It is a start to understanding the type of supports and research preparation that individuals within the fi eld require to successfully collaborate within research teams. Context Traditionally, research contributions in the humanities fi eld have been felt to be, and documented to be, predominantly solo efforts by academics involving little direct collaboration with others, a model reinforced through doctoral studies and beyond (See, for example, Cuneo, 2003; Newell & Swan, 2000). However, Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities is an exception to this. Given that the nature of research work involves computers and a variety of skills and expertise, Digital Humanities researchers are working collaboratively within their institutions and with others nationally and internationallly to undertake the research. This research typically involves the need to coordinate efforts between academics, undergraduate and graduate students, research assistants, computer programmers, librarians, and other individuals as well as the need to coordinate fi nancial and other resources. Despite this, there has been little formal research on team development within this community. That said, efforts toward understanding the organizational context in which Digital Humanites research is situated is beginning in earnest. Two large-scale survey projects (Siemens et al., 2002; Toms et al., 2004) have highlighted issues of collaboration, among other topics, and Warwick (2004) found that the organizational context has had an impact on the manner in which Digital Humanities/Humanities Computing centres developed in the United States and England. Other studies are underway as well. In addition, McCarty (2005b) explores the ways that computers have opened the opportunities for collaboration within the humanities and has explored the associated challenges of collaboration and team research within the HUMANIST listserve (2005a). Finally, through efforts such as the University of Victoria’s Digital Humanities/Humanities Computing Summer Institute and other similar ventures, the community is working to develop its collaborative capacity through workshops in topics like community-specifi c project management skills, which also includes discussion of team development and support. This study draws upon these efforts as it explores and documents the nature of research teams within the Digital Humanities community to the end of identifying exemplary work patterns and larger models of research collaboration that have the potential to strengthen this positive aspect of the community even further. Methods This project uses a qualitative research approach with indepth interviews with members of various multi-disciplinary, multi-location project teams in Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom. The interview questions focus on the participants’ defi nition of teams; their experiences working in teams; and the types of supports and research preparation required to ensure effective and effi cient research results. The results will include a description of the community’s work patterns and relationships and the identifi cation of supports and research preparation required to sustain research teams (as per Marshall & Rossman, 1999; McCracken, 1988). Preliminary Findings At the time of writing this proposal, fi nal data analysis is being completed, but clear patterns are emerging and, after fi nal analysis, these will form the basis of my presentation. The individuals interviewed currently are and have been a part of a diverse set of team research projects, in terms of research objective, team membership size, budget, and geographical dispersion, both within their own institution, nationally, and internationally. The roles they play are varied and include research assistant, researcher, computer programmer, and lead investigator. There are several commonalities among these individuals in terms of their skill development in team research and their defi nition of research teams and communities. When fi nal data analysis is complete, a series of exemplary patterns and models of research collaboration will be identifi ed and outlined. These patterns and models will include the identifi cation of supports and research preparation which can sustain research teams in the present and into the future. The benefi ts to the Digital Humanities community will be several. First, the study contributes to an explicit description of the community’s work patterns and relationships. Second, it also builds on previous efforts to understand the organizational context in which Digital Humanities/Humanities Computing centres operate in order to place focus on the role of the individual and teams in research success. Finally, it identifi es possible supports and research preparation to aid the further development of successful research teams. 