In the past, humanities scholars have primarily used text-based computational approaches to engage questions of authorship. In the area of visual arts, computational analysis of authorship is a growing field, but it is one that features diverse questions and requires complex algorithms, significant computational resources and a wide variety of experts from diverse disciplines to combine the results of visual inspections with computer generated results. Furthermore, when approaching the broad field of authorship-related questions in visual works, the variety of digital images representing cultural artifacts poses a formidable challenge on the robustness and accuracy of computer algorithms. The motivation of our work is to explore technologies that facilitate enquiry about authorship in visual art work and to address the challenges related to algorithm development, computational scalability of algorithms, distributed software development and data sharing, efficient communication tools across diverse disciplines, and robustness and general utility of algorithmic development when applied to a spectrum of authorship questions from historical images. In other words, we wanted to develop specific methods for new image-based research as well as build and model for future work in image processing and humanities research. We approached these challenges by selecting image subsets from the collections of 15th-century manuscripts, 17th and 18th-century maps, and 19th through 21st-century quilts that often have corporate and anonymous authors working in community groups, guilds, artisan shops, and scriptoriums, and report technologies designed to support authorship discoveries in these collections. Crucially, the questions our algorithms and experts address are concerned with using authorship as a trope for analysis and generating new data, not just verifying the heritage or identity of a given artifact.The research being presented as part of this paper submission is derived from the Digging into Data to Answer Authorship Related Questions Grant awarded as part of the Digging into Data Challenge Competition (www.diggingintodata.org). An international, multi-disciplinary team of researchers from the University of Illinois (US), the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (US), Michigan State University (US), and the University of Sheffield (UK), the DID team works to formulate and address the problem of finding salient characteristics of artists from two-dimensional (2D) images of historical artifacts. Given a set of 2D images of historical artifacts with known authors, our project teams aim to discover what salient characteristics make an artist different from others, and then to enable statistical learning about individual and collective authorship. The objective of this effort is to learn what is unique about the style of each artist, and to provide the results at a much higher level of confidence than previously has been feasible by exploring a large search space in the semantic gap of image understanding. Team members are geographically distributed and have very different backgrounds and expertise. While the discoveries require involvements and interactions of experts in computer science and in humanities, we had to design a methodology for communicating, coordinating web design and public relationship interfaces, large size data sharing, collaborative software development, software sharing and testing, and hardware sharing. We approached this spectrum of collaborative project challenges by (a) establishing communication and coordination channels (ooVoo videoconference, mailing lists, legal point of contacts regarding licenses and intellectual properties), (b) designing and deploying a content repository called Medici, (c) designing and documenting a library of content based file comparisons with standard application programming interfaces (API) for software development called Versus, (d) deploying software source control and bug tracking systems accessible to all team members (SVN and JIRA), (e) designing web-based workflow systems that could give access to hardware resources at any site for execution of algorithms called Cyberintegrator, and (f) providing additional tools and user interfaces for humanity scholars to view large size images and contribute to the interpretation of the computer generated results.Emphasizing the aspects of data-sharing, collaborative software development, distributed hardware resources, and interactions of experts from diverse domains in the Digging into Data project, we designed, developed and deployed technologies supporting a wide spectrum of team activities. The data, software and hardware sharing technologies include the Medici Content Management Repository (see Fig. 1),  Figure 1: User interface to the Medici management repository for data sharing, annotations and visualization of large size images. Full Size Image   the Im2Learn library of basic image processing and visualization algorithms that can be applied to various image analyses (see Fig. 2),  Figure 2: An example of a segmentation algorithm in Im2Learn library that was applied to historical map analyses (top) and manuscript illustration analyses (bottom). Full Size Image  Full Size Image   the Versus library for content-based image comparison (see Fig.3),  Figure 3: Initial user interface to Versus in order to support image comparison based analyses. Full Size Image   and the Cyberintegrator workflow for managing computations on distributed computational resources. The Medici Content Repository System is a web and desktop-enabled content management system that allows users to upload, collate, annotate, and run analytics on a variety of files types allowing for portable and open representation of data with extensible analytical tools. The analytical capabilities come from the Im2learn library that provides a plug-and-play interface for adding new algorithms and tools. Due to the fact that the authorship questions are frequently based on a comparison operation, we have designed additional API called Versus which allows everyone to contribute with comparison methods. Once the algorithms for image analyses and comparisons have been developed, they can be integrated into workflows (a sequence of algorithmic operations to reach the analytical goal) in Cyberintegrator workflow environment. Cyberintegrator is a user friendly editor to several middleware software components that:  enable users to easily include tools and data sets into a software/data unifying environment annotate data, tools and workflows with metadata visualize data and metadata share data and tools using local and remote context repository execute step-by-step workflows during scientific explorations gather provenance information about tool executions and data creations.  In order to support visual explorations of large size images and contribute to the interpretation of the computer generated results by humanists and computer scientists, we have also integrated Microsoft Live Lab’s Seadragon library to build image pyramids and support fast zoom in and out operations.Our paper addressed each logistical and computational facet of a distributed, international collaboration. Based on our initial effort, all team members have responded positively to the technologies introduced and also helped in defining requirements for executing such complex projects involving collaborative humanities research. Based on our current observations, the web technologies for data, software and hardware sharing provided the foundation blocks for addressing the authorship discovery challenges. We have also concluded that the open nature of joint software development is necessary for overcoming intellectual property right and other legal hurdles.We would like to acknowledge the NSF ITS 09-10562 EAGER grant and the NSF/NEH/JISC Digging into Data (NSF grant ID: 1039385).