The aim of this paper is to establish a model for the relationship between the player of a video game and the avatar that represents that player in the virtual world of the video game. I propose that there is an evolution in the identifi cation of the player of a video game with the avatar character that performs embodied actions in the virtual world of the game. This identifi cation can be described through an examination of theories from a variety of subject areas including philosophy, literary studies, video game theory, and educational theory. Specifi cally, theories in hermeneutics, literary immersion, embodiment, empathy, narrative, game ego, play, and learning theory are synthesized to produce a broad picture of the player/avatar relationship as it develops over time. I will identify stages in the process of feeling immersed in a game. This feeling of immersion can, but may not necessarily will, occur as the player engages in game play over a period of time. I will identify this process in stages: “other”; “embodied empathy”; “self-transcendence”; and “transformation.” At the fi nal stage, the game play can offer a critique of the player’s worldview, to call into question the player’s approach and even presuppositions about the world. I suggest here, the player no longer sees the avatar as an “other” a character to be understood in some way, and not as some virtual representation of the self, something apart from himself, and not even as some sort of virtual embodiment of himself. I suggest that the player transcends even the avatar as any sort of representation, that the avatar disappears from the consciousness of the player altogether. A result of this critique is a transformation that takes place within the player that may actually transform one’s self-understanding, thus providing the player with an authentic learning experience. There is a sense of embodiment that goes along with controlling an avatar in a virtual world that, I believe, is not present when becoming immersed in a fi lm or a book. In a video game, the player’s actions have direct and immediate consequences in terms of reward or punishment as well as movement through the virtual world. The narrative effect helps drive the character through this reward and punishment. The idea of affordances is often used in terms of game design and the use of emotional affordances to help propel the player into the virtual environment. Thus, with a video game, there is a more complete immersion into the constructed imaginary world— an embodied immersion and an emotional immersion. I would like to clarify the defi nition of this feeling of immersion that happens as a video game progresses. Various terms are used in the fi elds of literary analysis, psychology, video game theory, and philosophy. Terms like literary transport, fl ow, presence, immersion, identifi cation, and self-transcendence are often used to describe the feeling of the self moving out of the real world and into a constructed imaginary world. I use Janet Murray’s offers a commonly accepted defi nition used in the gaming industry for this term, a sense of being physically submerged in water (Murray 1997, p. 99). My goal here is to illuminate the idea that there is a process to gaining this feeling of immersion. The player proceeds step-by-step into the game world. The work of Gallagher in philosophy of mind acknowledges that there is a growth process that takes place in developing an understanding of other people, through primary and secondary interaction. Gallese offers an alternative argument that the biological basis of this growth in understanding happen initially as a neural response from the mirror neuron system, then as a more mature empathetic response. Ultimately, I would like to establish a sequence that combines the work of Gallese and Gallagher with the work of digital narrative theorists Ryan and Murray. The sequence of immersion could be stated as: other→empathy→selftranscendence→ transformation. The fi rst stage of approaching the avatar is learning the mechanics of the game. In this stage the player sees the avatar as “other,” as an awkward and theoretical representation of the self. Initially, the avatar is a picture or symbol for the self. The player learns to manipulate the keyboard, mouse, or controller. The avatar is “other,” a foreign virtual object that must be awkwardly manipulated by the player. In this stage there is little personal identifi cation with the avatar, except on a theoretical level. The avatar cannot function effi ciently according to the will of the player, but operates as a cumbersome vehicle for the player’s intentions. I propose that the player in the second stage the player begins to view the avatar as a character in a world, and the player begins to empathize with the character in a novel or in a fi lm. Let me clarify, here, that at this stage the avatar is still viewed as Other, but a component of empathy now emerges through the use of narrative. The player now has learned to effectively manipulate the character, to move the character through the virtual world. I believe, here, embodiment plays an important biological role in helping to establish this feeling of empathy for the character. There is also an important component of narrative that drives the player toward empathy with the avatar. The work of Marie-Laure Ryan is an important theoriest in this area. In the third stage, which I call “self-transcendence,” the player experiences full identifi cation with the avatar, not as empathizing with another character, but embodying the actions and world of the avatar as if it were his own. On this point, I will refer to Gadamer’s idea of the self-transcendence of play as well as his article “The Relevance of the Beautiful” and several authors working on the concept of immersion and game ego in video game theory (Murray, Wilhelmsson, Ryan). The literature on video game theory uses the terms immersion, fl ow, and presence in a similar way, but I feel Gadamer’s term “selftranscendence” more aptly fi ts the description I will offer. At the point of self-transcendence, transformation can happen. Learning theory and the philosophy of hermeneutics, especially as stated in the work of Gallagher in Hermeneutics and Education and the hermeneutic theories of Gadamer (specifi cally his fusion of horizons), can establish how understanding happens and how transformation of the self can take place more completely in the virtually embodied world of video games.