The SMIL Annotation Film Engine (presented at Digital Resources in the Humanities 2002) was a middle scale computing humanities project that sought to combine a real time video stream, an idiosyncratic metadata scheme, and the annotation and presentation affordances of SMIL. The first version of this project “Searching”, was based on John Ford’s 1956 western _The Searchers_ and a metadata scheme was defined from a hermeneutic claim, that “doorways in _The Searchers_ represent liminal zones between spaces that are qualities”. Doors, as they appear in the film, were encoded around a small data set (camera is inside, outside, or between, and is looking inside, outside, or between) and still images from the film are provided. A search by a user yields all the stills that meet the search criteria, and clicking on any still loads the appropriate sequence from the film for viewing in its cinematic context. As I argued in 2002, “Searching” operated as a ‘discovery engine’ rather than a metadata archival project, so what it developed in the engine is a process for the unveiling of patterns of meaning, and this would seem to offer an engaged middle ground for distributed humanities content that provides access to material while also foregrounding an applied critical or interpretive activity. Since 2002 such idiosyncratic data schemes have emerged via social software as folksonomies, and I have adopted the implications of this earlier project to develop a series of interactive video ‘sketches’ that foreground and explore the implications of a critical videographic essay practice. This is the writing of video, sound, text, and image into audiovisual knowledge objects that are porous to the contemporary network. These works have implications for new media and humanities pedagogy, as they offer a possible heuristic for teaching and learning that is between the traditional essay and the ‘interactive’ (whether online or CDROM hardly matters) reference work. These sketches are academic works that aim to reverse the usual hierarchy (and ideology) of relations between text and image that exists in academic research by allowing video and sound to ‘drive’ the writing (and vice versa). The model proposed allows academics or students to write their own interactive video based essays that are multilinear, academically sound, and network appropriate. The work has implications for humanities disciplines that study time and image based media, new media theory, and contemporary multimedia pedagogies, and the ‘paper’ will be such an ‘networked knowledge object’.