Introduction Since the mid 1990s there has been an increase in the interest for the design and use of conceptual models (ontologies) in humanities computing and library science, as well as in knowledge engineering in general. There is also a wish to use such models to enable information interchange. TEI has in its 20 years of history concentrated on the mark up of functional aspects of texts and their parts. That is, a person name is marked but linking to information about the real world person denoted by that name was not in the main scope. The scope of TEI has gradually broadened, however, to include more real world information external to the text in question. The Master project (Master 2001) is an early example of this change. In TEI P5 a series of new elements for marking up real world information are introduced and several such elements from the P4 are adjusted. TEI P5 is meant to be a set of guidelines for the encoding of a large variety of texts in many cultural contexts. Thus the set of real world oriented elements in TEI P5 should not formally be bound to a single ontology. The ontological part of TEI P5 is, however, close connected to the authors implicit world view. Thus we believe it is important to study this part of TEI P5 with some well defi ned ontology as a yardstick. Our long experience with memory institution sector makes CIDOC CRM (Conceptual Reference Model) a natural choice. CIDOC CRM (Crofts 2005) has been proven useful as an intellectual aid in the formulation of the intended scope of the elements in a new mark up schemes and we believe the model can be useful to clarify the ontological part of TEI. This will also clarify what is needed in order to harmonize it with major standards like CIDOC CRM, FRBR, EAD and CDWA Lite. CIDOC CRM CIDOC CRM is a formal ontology intended to facilitate the integration, mediation and interchange of heterogeneous cultural heritage information. It was developed by interdisciplinary teams of experts, coming from fi elds such as computer science, archaeology, museum documentation, history of arts, natural history, library science, physics and philosophy, under the aegis of the International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC) of the International Council of Museums (ICOM). The harmonisation of CIDOC CRM and IFLA’s FRBR (FRBR 1998) is in the process of being completed. The EAD has already been mapped to CIDOC CRM (Theodoridou 2001). CIDOC CRM is defi ned in an object oriented formalism which allow for a compact defi nition with abstraction and generalisation. The model is event centric, that is, actors, places and objects are connected via events. CIDOC CRM is a core ontology in the sense that the model does not have classes for all particulars like for example the Art and Architecture Thesaurus with thousands of concepts. CIDOC CRM has little more than 80 classes and 130 properties. The most central classes and properties for data interchange are shown below. Example: The issue of a medieval charter can be modelled as an activity connecting the issuer, witnesses, scribe and place and time of issue. The content of the charter is modelled as a conceptual object and the parchment as a physical thing. In cases where it is necessary for a scholarly analysis and when suffi cient information has been preserved, an issuing of a charter can be broken down into a series of smaller events, e.g., the actual declaration in a court, the writing of the parchment and the attachment of the seals. This conceptual analysis can be can be used an intellectual aid in the formulation a data model and implementation. In 2005 the CRM was reformulated as a simple XML DTD, called CRM-Core, to enable CRM compliant mark up of multimedia metadata (Sinclair 2006). A CRM-Core XML package may contain information about a single instance of any class in the CRM and how it may be connected to other objects via events and properties. The German Council of Museum has based its standard for XML based museum data interchange, MUSEUMDAT, on a combination of the Getty standard CDWA Lite and CRM Core. The CDWA Lite revision group currently considers these changes to CDWA Lite in order to make it compatible with CRM. TEI P5 ontology elements in the light of CIDOC CRM In TEI P5 the new ontologically oriented elements is introduced in the module NamesPlaces described in chapter 13 Names, Dates, People, and Places. There are additional elements described in chapter 10 Manuscript Description, in the TEI header and in connection with bibliographic descriptions as well. In this paper we concentrate on the elements in chapter 13. The central elements in this module are: person, personGrp, org, place and event. Person, personGrp and org are “elements which provide information about people and their relationships”. CIDOC CRM has the corresponding classes with a common superclass E29 Actor. The element event is defi ned as “contains data relating to any kind of signifi cant event associated with a person, place, or organization” and is similar to the CIDOC CRM class E5 Event and its subclasses. In the discussion of the marriage example in chapter 13, event element is presented as a “freestanding” element. In the formal defi nition it is limited to person and org. To make this coherent, the formal part will have to be extended or the example have to be changed. Still event is problematic. The marriage example demonstrates that it is impossible to express the role a person has in an event. Without knowing the English marriage formalism one doesn’t know if the “best man” participated. The very generic element persRel introduced in P5 does not solve this problem. A possible solution to this problem would be to introduce an EventStateLike model class with elements for roles and participants. The model classes orgStateLike, personStateLike, personTraitLik, placeStateLike, placeTraitLike group elements used to mark up characteristics of persons, organisations and places. The elements in ...TraitLike model classes contain information about permanent characteristics and the elements in ...StateLike information about more temporal characteristics. The model classes contain the generic Trait and State elements in addition to specialised elements. The intention is to link all characteristics relating to a person, organisation or place. It is not possible to make a single mapping from these classes into CIDOC-CRM. It will depend partly on which type of trait or strait is used, and partly on the way in which it is used. Many characteristics will correspond to persistent items like E55 Types, E3 String and E41 Appellation, and are connected to actors and places through the properties P1 is identifi ed, P2 has type and P2 has note. Other elements like fl oruit, which is used to describe a person’s active period, are temporal states corresponding to the CIDOC-CRM temporal entity E3 Condition State. From an ontological point of view the two elements state and trait can be considered as generic mechanism for typed linking between the major classes. All the elements in ...TraitLike and ...StateLike model classes can be supplied with the attributes notAfter and notBefore defi ning the temporal extension of their validity. This is a very powerful mechanism for expressing synoptically information based on hidden extensive scholarly investigation about real world events. As long as the justifi cation for the values in these elements is not present, however, it is hard to map this information into an event oriented conceptual model like the CRM. Thus, it is important to include descriptions of methods for such justifi cation in the guidelines, including examples. TEI ontology – conclusion The new elements in TEI P5 bring TEI a great step in the direction of an event oriented model. Our use of CRM Core as a yardstick has shown that small extensions to and adjustments of the P5 elements will enable the expression of CRM Core packages by TEI elements. This is a major change to our previous suggestions (Ore 2006) in which the ontological module was outside TEI. To continue this research, an extended TEI tagset should be developed with element for abstracts corresponding to the ones in FRBR and CRM. This will not change the ontological structure of TEI signifi cantly. But these adjustments will make the ontological information in a TEI document compliant with the other cultural heritage models like for example EAD, FRBR/FRBRoo, CIDOC CRM and CDWA-Lite. There is an ongoing harmonisation process between all these initiatives in which it is important that TEI is a part.