Columbia University, United States of America Text reuse detection technology and approximate text matching have made possible the large-scale computational identi cation of intertextuality. These technologies have often been used in plagiarism detection and in studies of journalistic text reuse. Fewer studies, however, have applied these methods to humanities research. We present a method for quantifying the critical reception history of a source text by analyzing the precise location, density and chronology of its citations. Our work builds on a recent set of digital humanities projects that use text reuse detection in order to study the afterlife of texts through textual quotation. The Viral Texts project and Digital Breadcrumbs of Brothers Grimm take algorithmic approaches to studying text reuse and circulation in their respective fields of research: nineteenth-century popular press and folklore. In both projects, the focus is on using text reuse detection to uncover hidden networks of reuse-the reprinting of short news items and the reuse of motifs or minimal narrative units in folklore-in corpora without standardized conventions of citation. Our project seeks to take this work a step further, by applying a similar method in a di erent area of cultural production where more standardized citation conventions already exist: academic citations. We draw on the work of Dennis Tenen-in using extracted citations to critically visualize the "knowledge domain" of Comparative Literature-and a recent project by JSTOR Labs that uses the text of Shakespeare's plays and the U.S. Constitution to visualize the scholarship surrounding passages in those sets of texts (Tenen, forthcoming in 2017). Like these projects, we hope to leverage the explicit and institutionalized nature of academic citation in studying text-reuse patterns, using text reuse to ask questions of critical attention in canon formation. By focusing initially on a single text in order to ask about its critical reception history, we hope to provide new methods for studying not only text-reuse patterns, but the sociology of citation practices-studying changes in when, how, and what critics cite from a given text. In applying these methods to literary scholarship, we've chosen to start on a relatively small scale. George Eliot's novel Middlemarch is an ideal test case, due to its length, copyright status, stable editorial history and canonicity. Perhaps most appropriately for this study, Middlemarch is known for its narrator's wise generalizations-highly quotable fragments that have been featured in more than one Victorian volume of George Eliot's sayings. For the full project we are working with JSTOR Labs to assemble a corpus of all 6,500 articles on Middlemarch in their collection. The gures below display preliminary results with a smaller 483-sample corpus. Figure 1. Citation Frequency Heat Map for Middlemarch, by Decade At the largest scale, Figure 1 shows the frequency of citations across the whole of Middlemarch as a heat map segmented by decade, with yellow signifying the highest citation and black, no citations. Here, the novel is broken into 50 segments along the horizontal axis, and each segment is colored according to the number of times any part of its text has appeared in the critical literature. A number of overall trends are noticeable here. The very beginning and the end of the novel show the most numbers of quotations, followed by the rst quarter of the novel. Overall, the second half of the novel, except for the ending, is signi cantly less quoted from than the first half.