Most of the video information retrieval systems today rely on some set of computationally extracted video and/or audio features, which may be complemented with manually created annotation that is usually either arduous to create or significantly impaired at capturing the content. In this research we set out not only to find the computational features relevant to movies, but also to investigate how much information could be semi- automatically extracted from the production documentation created during the actual production stages a film goes through. It was our hypothesis that this documentation, which has been carefully created for the realization of a movie, would prove highly useful as a source of metadata describing the finished movie. This paper presents research done at the MediaTeam Oulu research group [1] on identifying and structuring the key metadata descriptors applicable to motion picture content analysis and use of motion picture content in video-on-demand applications. The underlying research includes a study of the concepts involved in narrative structure and a series of empirical viewer tests through which a key set of metadata describing the content and structure of motion picture material was identified. Parts of this research were conducted in co-operation with the Department of Finnish, Information Studies and Logopedics at the University of Oulu [2]. First, established theories and concepts of narration were utilized to examine how movies are structured and what mechanisms are used to package and convey information to the viewer. Studying the formalisms and conventions governing film scripts and screenplays, we attempted to identify and characterize the key elements in movies, e.g. characters, actions and various types of plot points [3]. In addition to these primary elements, we also looked at supporting elements [4], i.e. the kinds of production-related techniques and instruments the filmmakers use in trying to guide the viewer’s attention throughout a movie. We found that, for example, editing rhythm and various changes or events in the audiovisual composition of a movie are among the most frequently utilized instruments for highlighting certain sections of a movie where the user should pay more (or less) attention. Our goal in studying these conventions and story-telling instruments was to first understand the domain of the filmmaker - his intended form and function for a movie - before looking at what actions or reactions the movie causes on the part of the viewer. Secondly, a series of tests using short clips, trailers and an entire movie was carried out in order to investigate how people perceive and process movies [5]. Questionnaires and interviews provided information on what kinds of things viewers notice and how they later describe what they have seen. This information was used to arrive at a key set of metadata that models movies using the same concepts as viewers do in describing them. It was then our task to match these concepts to the instruments used by the filmmakers, in order to find a metadata model that is both usable and feasible to create through a semi-automatic process from what is offered by the movie. Furthermore, the model thus constructed was designed hierarchical in order to facilitate dynamic control over the level of detail in any given metadata category, thereby enabling, for example, the smart summarization of movies on multiple levels. This metadata model then became the starting point for the design of the actual browser that an end-user would utilize in navigating and searching movies. The next step was to identify the main sources for obtaining this metadata and the best methods for obtaining it. In studying the movie production stages and the documentation relating to each stage, we found that the final script and storyboards, as well as the audio and video tracks of the finished movie were the most interesting and also most practical sources. A comprehensive suite of both automatic and semi- automatic tools for processing these documents and media objects was developed in order to extract the necessary features and information, such as the participants in any given scene, the speakers and the level of interaction between them, motion activity detected on the video track and a wide range of sound properties extracted from the audio track. These tools included a ScriptTagger, StoryLinker, Scene Hierarchy Editor and a management tool for the underlying database. The ScriptTagger is a tool which takes in the raw text of the script and turns it automatically into a structured XML document, which can then be further refined semi-automatically to facilitate the tagging of more advanced features. The StoryLinker is a tool used to bring together the script, the storyboards and the video and audio tracks of the movie itself to form individual scenes, where all of the above are linked. The Scene Hierarchy Editor is a semi-automatic tool for grouping together individual scenes using the model constructed on the basis of narrative structure and viewer tests, thus constructing a hierarchical description of the movie. In addition to these, a number of tools were used to extract the audio and video features. A management tool was used to combine the output produced by all the tools above to construct a uniform database. Ultimately, a prototype of a content-based browser for accessing movies using the metadata model and specialized feature visualization was developed. The implemented browser prototype is a multimodal, content-based retrieval system that enables a wide range of searches based on the hierarchical metadata. This prototype offers users customized views into a movie using user-selectable criteria. The main view offered by the prototype is a navigable hierarchical map of the movie, where the user-selected features are visualized as navigation aids. Users can then move from a higher level down to increasingly detailed descriptions of the movie, i.e. from acts to segments and ultimately to scenes, enabling them to navigate their way down to a particular sequence, ultimately allowing cross comparison of similar sequences in other movies in the database. Alternatively, users may progress through a selected movie on some chosen level of detail, thus enabling them to see the structure of the movie based on the criteria they have chosen. The criteria can be changed on any level or at any point while browsing, i.e. features can be added or removed, as the user sees fit based on how well the features are applicable to the material on any given level and how well they answer the overall search needs of the user. The browser can visualize any new features as long as those features are submitted into the system in the correct format. The browser and its associated metadata creation tools have numerous applications ranging from, for example, commercial video-on-demand applications for both consumers and media publishing houses to more research oriented ones, such as analysis tools not only for film studies but indeed also for linguistic research into dramatic content, for example of movies and television series. The system could, for example, be used to find certain kinds of conversations or sequences of interest based on their content, structure or audiovisual makeup. The tool is suitable for incorporating non-linguistic information into linguistic information, which has various applications when studying multimodal content, for example in the investigation of expressions of stance, where paralinguistic features complement the linguistic realization of attitude and emotion. The ideas developed and lessons learned from the construction of these tools and browser will also be applied to a new electronic framework for the collection, management, online display, and exploitation of corpora, which is being developed within the LICHEN project (The Linguistic and Cultural Heritage Electronic Network) [6].