The world we live in generates so much data that the very structure of our societies has been transformed as a result. The way we produce, manage and treat information is changing; and the way we present this information and make it available raises numerous questions. Is it possible to give information an intuitive form, one that will enable understanding and memory? Can we give data a form better suited to human cognition? How can information display enhance the utility, interest and necessary features of data, while aiding memories to take hold of it? This article will explore the relevance of extracting and visualizing data within a corpus of text documents revolving around the theme of posthumanism. When a large quantity of data must be represented, visualizing the information implies a process of synthesis, which can be assisted by techniques of automated text document analysis. Analysis of the text documents is followed by a process of visualization and abstraction, which allows a global visual metaphoric representation of information. In this article, we will discuss techniques of data mining and the process involved in creating a prototype information-cartography software; and suggest how information-cartography allows a more intuitive exploration of the main themes of a textual corpus and contributes to information visualization enhancement. Introduction Human civilization is now confronted with the problem of information overload. How can we absorb an ever-increasing quantity of information? How can we both comprehend it and fi lter it according to our cognitive tools (which have adapted to understand general forms and structures but struggle with sequential and cumulative data)? How can we mine the riches that are buried in information? How can we extract the useful, necessary, and essential pieces of information from huge collections of data? Most importantly, how can we guarantee the literal survival of memory? For why should we remember when an uncountable number of machines remember for us? And how can we remember when machines won’t allow us to forget? Human memory has endured through time precisely because it is unaware of the greater part of the signals the brain receives (our senses gather over 11 million pieces of information per second, of which the brain is only aware of a maximum of 40 (Philipps, 2006, p.32)). Memory exists because it can forget. Is an electronic archive a memory? We must rethink the way that we produce and handle information. Can we give it a more intuitive form that would better lend itself to retention and understanding? Can we better adapt it to human cognition? How can we extrapolate narratives from databases? How can we insert our memories into this machine memory? The answer is simple: by visualizing it. For the past few years, the technical aspect of information representation and visualization has been the subject of active research which is gaining more and more attention (Card et al., 1999; Chen, 1999; Don et al., 2007; Geroimenko and Chen, 2005; Perer and Shneiderman, 2006; Spence, 2007). Despite the richness of the work that has been done, there is still a glaring lack of projects related to textual analyses, specifi cally of literary or theoretical texts, which have successfully integrated advances in the fi eld of information visualization. Objectives Our project is part of this visual analytical effort. How can we visually represent posthumanism? How can we produce an image of its questions and challenges? How can we transform the enormous quantity of associated information the concept carries into something intuitive? We believe that the creation of a thematic map is part of the solution. Why a map? Because the information-driving suffocation we experience is also our inability to create cognitive maps (as Fredric Jameson suggested). And so we challenged ourselves to create a map of posthumanism, one that could be read and understood intuitively. To do this, we have chosen to use Google Earth (GE) as the basic interface for the project. GE’s interface is naturally intuitive. It corresponds to our collective imagination and it also allows users to choose the density of information they desire. GE allows the user to “dive” into the planet’s geographical, political, and social layers, or to stay on higher, more general levels. GE “tells” the story of our way of seeing the world. GE shows us the world the way science describes it and political maps draw it. This leads us to confront three primary challenges: the fi rst was to fi nd an area to represent posthumanism. The second was to give this area a visual form. The third was to integrate, in an intuitive way, the signifi cant number of data and texts on the subject. Methodology In order to successfully create this thematic map, we fi rst compiled a signifi cant number of texts about posthumanism. The methodology used to treat the corpus was inspired by previous work in the fi eld of text mining (Forest, 2006; Ibekwe- Sanjuan, 2007; Weiss et al., 2005). The goal of the analysis is to facilitate the extraction and organization of thematic groups. Non-supervised clustering technique is used in order to produce a synthetic view of the thematic area of the subject being treated. The data is processed in four main steps: 1. Segmentation of the documents, lexical extraction and fi ltering 2. Text transformation using vector space model 3. Segment classifi cation 4. Information visualization Having established and sorted a sizeable informationpopulation, a new continent was needed. The continental outline of Antarctica was adopted. Antarctica was chosen because its contours are relatively unknown and generally unrecognizable; it tends to be thought of more as a white sliver at the bottom of the world map than a real place. Politically neutral Antarctica, whose shape is curiously similar to that of the human brain, is a large area surrounded by oceans. These qualities made it symbolically ideal for utilization in a map of posthumanism, a New World of the 21st century. Antarctica also allowed us to avoid information overload typical of a populated area: it carries minimal associative memories and historic bias; few people have lived there. To differentiate our new continent, the contour of Antarctica was moved into the mid Pacifi c. The continent was then reskinned visually with terrain suggestive of neurology, cybernetics, and symbiosis. The end result was a new land mass free of memories ready for an abstract population. Visualizing the results After identifying the thematic structure of the corpus, themes are converted into regions. Themes are assigned portions of the continent proportional to their occurrence. Inside each major region are 2 added levels of analysis: sub-regions and subsub- regions, each represented by several keywords. Keywords correspond to clusters discovered during the automated text analysis. So it is possible to burrow physically downward into the subject with greater and greater accuracy; or to rest at an attitude above the subject and consider the overall ‘terrain’. Each area is associated with a category of documents. From each area it is possible to consult the documents associated with each region. Figure 1. A general level of the visualized thematic map The system offers users a certain number of areas, based on the algorithms used to process the data. These areas represent themes. Clicking on the brain icons allows the user to read an excerpt from one of the texts that is part of the cluster. Figure2. A specifi c level of the thematic map When the user zooms in on a region, the application shows the next level in the hierarchy of data visualization. Within one theme (as shown below) several sub-themes appear (in red). A greater number of excerpts is available for the same area. The icons indicating the availability of texts may be clicked on at any time, allowing the user to read the excerpt in a small pop-up window, which includes a link to the whole article. This pop-up window can serve to show pertinent images or other hyperlinks. Figure 4. 3-dimensional rendering of the thematic map At any time, the user can rotate the point of view or change its vertical orientation. This puts the camera closer to the ground and allows the user to see a three dimensional landscape. Conclusion We see the visualization of data, textual or otherwise, as part of a fundamental challenge: how to transform information into knowledge and understanding. It is apparent that the signifi cant amount of data produced by research in both science and the humanities is often much too great for any one individual. This overload of information sometimes leads to social disinvestment as the data eventually cancel each other out. We think that giving these data an intuitive form will make their meaning more understandable and provide for their penetration into the collective consciousness. Posthumanism seems particularly well adapted to pioneer this system because it questions the very defi nition of what it is to be human.