This paper will describe and analyse the generic structure of linguistic articles, using a corpus-based methodology and working within a contrastive (English-French) perspective. The main question that we wish to answer is the following: “Do scientific articles – and more particularly linguistics ones – have a generic structure, and to what extent does this structure vary from one language to another?” We will answer this linguistic question using techniques from computational and corpus linguistics. The notion of genre is more and more present, as much in linguistics as in information retrieval or in didactics. Genres and texts are intimately connected, as genres could not be tackled within the restricted framework of the word or the sentence. Indeed, genres can only be perceptible using text corpora both generically homogeneous and representative of the genre studied. The progress of information technology and the possibilities of digitization have made it possible to gather homogeneous and synchronic corpora of written texts to analyse and characterize genres. Moreover, the development of computational linguistics, of linguistic statistics and more generally of corpus linguistics has led to that of tools and methods to process large corpora which make it possible nowadays to detect linguistic phenomena and regularities that could not have been traced before. In that sense, inductive typological methods and multi-dimensional statistical methods (see Biber, 1988) seem crucial to make the criteria which define the genres appear more clearly. If literary genres have been largely explored, the study of academic / scientific and professional genres has mainly been undertaken for about thirty years within a more applied trend. English for Specific Purpose, is a rhetorical-functional trend which is interested in macro-textual descriptions and in describing genres from a phrasal or propositional point of view. The description of rhetorical moves (see Swales, 1990) is rather qualitative than quantitative, as the moves can scarcely be automatically identified – although several studies have set out to demonstrate their relative identification by training classifiers on manually annotated corpora (Kando, 1999 and Langer et al., 2004). Our perspective is however different, as we do not start from a set of predefined moves: our objective is indeed to describe the genre of the article and its structure in a quantitative perspective, starting from three levels of description: the structural, the morphosyntactic and the lexical level. The study is based on a generically homogeneous corpus composed of French and English journal articles that all belong to the linguistic domain, chosen as this is the field we have the best expertise in. The French corpus is made up of 32 issues of 11 linguistic journals, that amounts to 224 articles; whereas the English one includes 100 articles, that is 16 issues of 4 linguistic journals. Texts have all been issued between 1995 and 2001 to limit the possibilities of diachronic variations. In order to describe the document structure of scientific articles, we first marked up the document structure and the article constituents according to the Text Encoding Initiative Guidelines (Sperberg-McQueen et al., 2001), to ensure the corpus reusability and comparability with other corpora: the article sections were taken into account (introduction, body, divisions, conclusion), as well as its titles, subtitles, and specific components (examples, citations, appendices, etc.). This XML markup enabled us to obtain the main characteristics of the article structure and organization in the two languages (number of sections, structure depth, etc.) and to assess their stability and differences, using XSL stylesheets. Once these characteristics were established, we focused on the article sections: as both French and English linguistics articles are not submitted to an IMRAD structure (Introduction, Materials and methods, Results, Analysis, Discussion), only introductions and conclusions could be directly observed and compared. Indeed, it would have been irrelevant to analyze “third sections” as many texts are only divided into two main parts. The linguistic properties of introductions and conclusions were described thanks to two different levels of description: the lexical and the morphosyntactic levels, which did not require the same processing. The lexical characteristics of the sections were first obtained using Alceste and its Hierarchical Descendant Classification. We then concentrated on the morphosyntactic level, on the one hand because morphosyntactic variables easily lend themselves to voluminous data as they are formal enough to be tagged and calculable and on the other hand because various studies have demonstrated their efficiency in genre processing (Karlgren & Cutting 1994; Kessler et al., 1997; Malrieu & Rastier 2001; Poudat, 2003). Although several taggers are available, they are generally little adapted to the processing of scientific texts; for instance, the French Inalf Institute trained Brill tagger on 19th century novels and Le Monde articles. Most of the English taggers are trained on the Penn TreeBank corpus and use very robust tagsets which interest is descriptively very weak. As many available taggers are trainable (Brill Tagger, TreeTagger, TnT tagger, etc.), we decided to develop our own tagset and to generate a new tagger devoted to the processing of scientific texts. We then used a specific tagset of 136 descriptors (described in Poudat, 2004) to process the French corpus. The tagset is devoted to the characteristics of scientific discourse, and gathers the general descriptive hypothesis put forward in the literature concerning scientific discourse. Among the very specific variables we developed, we can mention symbols, title cues (such as 1.1.), modals, connectives, dates, two categories for the IL personal pronoun, in order to distinguish between the French anaphoric and impersonal IL, etc. The training task is very costly, as it requires the building of a manually annotated training corpus that has to be large enough to enable the system to generate tagging rules. For this reason, it was only led on the French corpus, using TnT tagger. We then adapted the tags and the outputs of CLAWS (the Constituent Likelihood Automatic Word-tagging System developped at Lancaster University, see Garside, 1987) to get comparable data. The morphosyntactic characteristics of the French and English introductions and conclusions were then determined, using statistical methods. After having described our methodology, we will present the results obtained thanks to this same methodology. The last part of our paper will discuss the conclusions that could be drawn from these findings.