In this paper we are presenting the Heinrich Heine Portal, one of the most sophisticated web resources dedicated to a German classical author. It virtually combines the two most defi nitive critical editions (DHA=Düsseldorfer Heine- Ausgabe and HSA=Heine Säkularausgabe) in print together with digital images of the underlying textual originals within an elaborated electronic platform. The project, which has been established in 2002, is organized as a co-operation between the Heinrich-Heine-Institut (Düsseldorf) and the Competence Centre for Electronic Publishing and Information Retrieval in the Humanities (University of Trier). It has been funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Organisation) as well as the Kunststiftung Nordrhein-Westfalen (Foundation for the Arts of North Rhine Westphalia). The work within the project consists of two major parts. On the one hand it has to transfer the printed texts into a digital representation which serves as the basis for its electronic publication. On the other hand it aims at a complete revision of important parts of the printed critical edition and provides new results of the Heinrich-Heine research community. The fi rst part of the workfl ow is organized as a typical retro-digitization project. Starting with the printed editions, consisting of nearly 26,500 pages with an amount of about 72 millions of characters, the text was sent to a service partner in China, where it was typed in by hand. During this process two digital versions of the text were produced and then sent back to Germany, where they were automatically collated. After that the listed differences were manually corrected by comparing them with the printed original. The result of this step is a digital text that corresponds with the printed version providing a quality of nearly 99.995%. The next task was to transform this basic digital encoding into a platform independent representation, which then can be used as the main data format for all following project phases. In order to achieve this goal a pool of program routines was developed which uses the typographical information and contextual conditions to generate XML-markup according to the TEI guidelines. Because of the heterogeneous structures of the text (prose, lyrics, critical apparatus, tables of contents etc.) this was a very time consuming step. At the end of this process a reusable version of the data that can be put into the archives on a long time basis exists. Using the XML encoding the digital documents were imported into an online database, where different views onto the data are stored separately, e.g. metadata for the main information about the letter corpus (list of senders, addressees, dates and places etc.) or bibliographical information on the works. In order to get access to the information from the database the project has been supplied with a sophisticated graphical user interface, which has been built with the help of a content management framework (ZOPE). Besides providing online access to the basic editions DHA and HSA the Heinrich-Heine-Portal offers a completely revised and updated version of the letter corpus and displays newlydiscovered letters and corrigenda, which are being added constantly. Additionally, the portal is an electronic archive which contains and presents more than 12,000 digital images of original manuscripts and fi rst editions, linked to the text and the apparatus of the edition. Most of those images were made available by the Heinrich-Heine-Institut, Düsseldorf, which holds nearly 60% of the Heine-manuscripts known today. The collection of the Heine-Institut was completely digitized for this project. In addition, 32 other museums, libraries and literary archives in Europe and the United States are cooperating with the Heine-Portal and have given us consent to present manuscripts from their collections. Among them are the British Library and the Rothschild Archive in London, the Russian Archives of Social and Political History in Moscow, the Foundation of Weimar Classics and many others. One of the long-term goals of the Heine-Portal is a “virtual unifi cation” of all of Heine’s manuscripts. Beyond that the Heine-Portal offers extensive bibliographies of primary sources and secondary literature, from Heine’s own fi rst publications in a small journal (1817) up to the most recent secondary literature. Other research tools of the Heine-Portal are a powerful search engine and a complex hyperlink structure which connects the texts, commentaries and the different sections of the Portal with each other and a database of Heine’s letters with detailed information on their edition, their availability and the institutions which hold them. Our paper will describe the technical and philological aspects of the work process that was necessary for the completion of the Heine-Portal, it will give an account of its main functions and demonstrate their use for students and scholars alike, and it will discuss possible pedagogical applications for schools as well as university teaching.