 Rationale & AnalysisInk After Print is a full-body, playable literary interface. Exhibited at rock festivals, public libraries and train stations (in a French copy of the Danish original), Ink brings full-body haptics to the unbound book in ways that resonate with the embodied online social marketing of YA [young adult] titles. Both Ink and Selp-Helf ask the reader to do real things in the world, and leave traces of those activities in the literary interface, whether it's navigating through the sea of words in "Ink" and printing the results, or posting photos of oneself when meeting the YA author, or dressing up as a character (in this case, teen girls dressing as Miranda Sings.)In both cases, writer/readers or "w/readers" (Landau, 1999) are having authentic experiences with literary interfaces. "Spreadable media" (Jenkins, Ford and Green, 2013) is a byproduct that empowers Ballinger's fans to use her book as a springboard to articulate their own perspectives on identity and gender. Use of digital skills is the precondition for fan interaction. Jenkins reminds us that audiences are individuals, "produced through measurement and surveillance, usually unaware of how the traces they leave can be calibrated by the media industries." Publics are collectives that "actively direct attention onto the messages they value" (166). An entire subculture of book fans-often of young adult literature-is using books as totems around which to build worlds made by and through participatory media; Selp-Helf is one strong example. Selp-Helf and other YA books like it are centerpieces of book-specific media microecologies with particularized rules of conduct, aesthetics, and dynamic interaction. "Playability" focuses through the book, but exceeds the bounded dimensions of the book itself.As more book marketing focuses on live events captured for and refracted through social media, this paper proposes that book interactivity should do more to engage the actual practice of reading to draw audiences into memorable relationships with the works. Analysis will focus on how the physical aspects of unbound book reading disclose new quantitative and qualitative shifts in mass market book reading practices.Book publishers, loathe to develop content that they can't expressly monetize, run cheap social media campaigns in platforms they don't own like YouTube, Twitter, Instagram and Snapchat. That's where book publishers should look to literary experimental pieces like Ink for how to create "eventness" (pace Bahktin) around distribution and play beyond social media.This would involve investment in digital-first book design and possibly a reading apparatus that could be physically moved location to location. Such techniques could scale, having a few select interactive reading "shows" that are captured in and for the social media audiences. Book publishers have built the expectation among YA readers that social media is their gathering space. Following the example of Ink After Print, publishers could offer actual, embodied, interactive reading experiences.Ink After Print provides a rich context for readers to experiment with their affective experience of boundedness. The mechanics of Ink gameplay are sufficiently challenging that readers might feel a sense of reward in assembling a poem using the hand-held "books"; in this sense, the printed receipt is token of achievement. But it is also a highly portable object and a potential gift: to the ephemeral community of others playing Ink After Print, where you can share your poems with others who have played; and to the virtual community where Ink "receipts" are stored in the blog. When I curated a media arts show and exhibited Ink, I observed readers also folding their receipts into small objects that they then shared with others. The untrackability of what people do with their Ink "receipts" stands in stark contrast to the databased traces of participation left by fans of Selp-Helf. While Ink does output to a blog, its outputs focus on the words themselves, not the user identity. In this sense, Ink resists the types of identity quantification that feeds and funds corporate sponsorship of social media platforms.  Note  