1 Overview Genre and its relation to textual style has long been studied, but only recently has it been a candidate for computational analysis. In this paper, we apply computational stylistics techniques to the study of genre, which allows us to analyze large amounts of text efficiently. Such techniques enable us to compare rhetorical styles between different genres; in particular, we are studying the communication of scientists through their publications in peer-reviewed journals. Our work examines possible genre/stylistic distinctions between articles in different fields of science, and seeks to relate them to methodological differences between the fields. We follow Cleland’s (2002) work in this area and divide the sciences broadly into Experimental and Historical sciences. According to this and other work in the philosophy of science, Experimental science attempts to formulate general predictive laws, and so relies on repeatable series of controlled experiments that test specific hypotheses (Diamond 2002), whereas Historical science deals more with contingent phenomena (Mayr 1976), studying unique events in the past in an attempt to find unifying explanations for their effects. We consider the four fundamental dimensions outlined by Diamond (2002, pp. 420-424): 1. Is the goal of the research to find general laws or statements or ultimate (and contingent) causes? 2. Is evidence gathered by manipulation or by observation? 3. Is research quality measured by accurate prediction or effective explanation? 4. Are the objects of study uniform entities (which are interchangeable) or are they complex entities (which are ultimately unique)? The present experiment was designed to see if language features support these philosophical points. These linguistic features should be topic independent and representative of the underlying methodology; we are seeking textual clues to the actual techniques used by the writers of these scientific papers. This paper is partially based on our previously presented results (Argamon, Chase & Dodick, 2005). 2 Methodology 2.1 The Corpus Our corpus for this study is a collection of recent (2003) articles drawn from twelve peer-reviewed journals in six fields, as given in Table 1. The journals were selected based both on their prominence in their respective fields as well as our ability to access them electronically, with two journals chosen per field and three fields chosen from each of Historical and Experimental sciences. Each article was prepared by automatically removing images, equations, titles, headings, captions, and references, converting each into a simple text file for further processing. 2.2 Systemic Functional Linguistics We base our analysis on the theory of Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL; Halliday 1994), which construes language as a set of interlocking choices or systems for expressing meanings, with general choices constraining the possible more specific choices. SFL presents a large number of systems, each representing a certain type of functional meaning for a potential utterance. Each system has conditions constraining its use and several options; once within a system we can choose but one option. Specific utterances are constrained by all the systemic options they realize. This approach to language allows the following types of questions to be asked: In places where a meaning of general type A is to be expressed in a text, what sorts of more specific meanings are more likely to be expressed in different contexts? We focused on several systems for this study, chosen to correspond with the posited differences between the types of science we study: Expansion, Modality, and Comment (Matthiessen 1995). Expansion describes features linking clauses causally or logically, tying in to dimensions 1 and 4 above. Its three types are: Extension, linking different pieces of information; Elaboration, deepening a given meaning via clarification or exemplification; and Enhancement, qualifying previous information by spatial, temporal, or other circumstance. The second system, Modality, relates to how the likelihood, typicality, or necessity of an event is indicated, usually by a modal auxiliary verb or an adjunct adverbial group; as such it may serve to indicated differences on dimensions 2, 3, and 4. There are two main types of modality: Modalization, which quantifies levels of likelihood or frequency, and Modulation, which qualifies ability, possibility, obligation, or necessity of an action or event. Finally, the system of Comment is one of assessment, comprising a variety of types of ``comment” on a message, assessing the writer’s attitude towards it, its validity or its evidential status; this provides particular information related to dimensions 1 and 3. In our analysis, it will be most helpful to look at oppositions, in which an option in a particular system is strongly indicative of one article class (either Experimental or Historical science) while a different option of that same system is indicative of the other class. Such an opposition indicates a meaningful linguistic difference between the classes of articles, in that each prefers a distinctive way (its preferred option) of expressing the same general meaning. 2.3 Computational analysis Because hand analysis is impractical on large document sets the first analyses were done via computer. We built a collection of keywords and phrases indicating each option in the aforementioned systems. Each document is first represented by a numerical vector corresponding to the relative frequencies of each option within each system. From here, machine learning was applied in the form of the SMO (Platt 1998) algorithm as implemented on the Weka machine learning toolkit (Witten & Frank 1999), using 10-fold cross-validation in order to evaluate classification effectiveness. This method was chosen in part because it generates weights for each feature; a feature has high weight (either positive or negative) if it is strongly indicative for one or the other class. 2.4 Human annotation To measure the validity of our computational analysis, we are also performing hand tagging of systemic features on a subset of the corpus articles. Two articles from each journal have been chosen, each to be tagged by two trained raters. Part of the tagging process is to highlight key words or phrases indicating each option; we will compare these statistics to our previously generated feature lists in order to test and refine them. The tagging is currently under way; we will present results at the conference. 4 Results To determine the distinctiveness of Historical and Experimental scientific writing, the machine learning techniques described above were applied to pairs of journals, giving for each pair a classification accuracy indicating how distinguishable one journal was from the other. These results are shown in Figure 1, divided into four subsets: Same, where both journals are from the same science; Hist and Exper with pairs of journals from different sciences, but the same type; and Diff indicates pairings of Historical journals with Experimental ones. The thick black line indicates the mean for each set, and the outlined box represents the standard deviation. As we see, journal pairs become more distinguishable as their methodological differences increase. Interestingly, Historical journals appear more stylistically homogenous than the Experimental journals, which is a subject for further study. This shows that SFL is capable of discriminating between the different genres presented. We also examined the most important features across the 36 trials between different journals. The most consistently indicative-those features that are ranked highest for a class in at least 25 trials-are presented in Table 2. The table is arranged as a series of oppositions: the features on each row are in the same system, one side indicating Historical, the other Experimental. In the system of Expansion, we see an opposition of Extension and Enhancement for Historical and Experimental sciences, respectively. This implies more independent information units in Historical science, and more focused storylines within Experimental science. Furthermore, there are oppositions inside both systems, indicating a preference for contrasting information (Adversative) and contextualization (Matter) in Historical science and for supplementary Information (Additive) and time-space (Spatiotemporal) relations in Experimental science. DH.indb 44 6/06/06 10:55:20 DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2006 Single Sessions P. 45 Figure 1: Learning accuracy for distinguishing articles in different pairs of journals. ‘Same’ are pairs where both journals are in the same field, ‘Historical’ and ‘Experimental’ represent pairs of journals in different Historical and Experimental fields, and ‘Different’ pairs of journals where one journal is experimental and the other historical. Means and standard deviation ranges are shown. System Historical Experimental Expansion Extension(26) Enhancement(31) Elaboration Apposition(28) Extension Adversative(30) Additive(26) Enhancement Matter(29) Spatiotemporal(26) Comment Admissive(30) Validative(32) Predictive(36) Modality Type Modalization(36) Modulation(35) Modulation Obligation(29) Readiness(26) Modality Value High(27) Modility Orientation Objective(31) Subjective(31) Table 2. Consistent indicator features within each of the systems used in the study. Numbers in parentheses show in how many paired-classification tests the feature names was an indicator for the given class of documents. References Argamon, S., Chase, P., and Dodick, J.T. (2005). The Languages of Science: A Corpus-Based Study of The system of Comment also supports the posited differences in the sciences. The Experimental sciences’ preference for Predictive comments follows directly from their focus on predictive accuracy. On the Historical side, Admissive comments indicate opinions (as opposed to factual claims), similarly Validative comments show a concern with qualifying the validity of assertions, comprising more of strong evidence than rigid proofs. Finally in Modality we see interesting contrasted features. On the top level we have near-perfect opposition between Modalization and Modulation in general; Historical sciences speak of what is ‘normal’ or ‘likely’, while Experimental sciences assess what ‘must’ or ‘is able’ to happen. 5 Conclusion This work is the first step in developing new automated tools for genre analysis, which promises the possibility of automatically analyzing large corpora efficiently or stylistic aspects while giving human interpretable results. The specific research presented has implications for the understanding of the relationship between scientific methodology and its linguistic realizations, and may also have some impact on science education. Future work (beyond the hand annotation and analysis already in progress) includes looking into stylistic variation within different article sections, as well as other analysis techniques (such as principle components analysis). Journal #Art Avg. Words J. Geology 93 4891 J. Metamorphic Geol. 108 5024 Biol. J. Linnean Society 191 4895 Human Evolution 169 4223 Palaeontologia Electronica 111 4132 Quaternary Research 113 2939 Physics Letters A 132 2339 Physical Review Letters 114 2545 J. Physical Chemistry A 121 4865 J. Physical Chemistry B 71 5269 Heterocycles 231 3580 Tetrahedron 151 5057 Table 1: Journals used in the study; the top represents historical fields with experimental sciences below.