Introduction Recent research at the Centre for Computing in the Humanities at King’s College London has focussed on the role and place of the digital humanities in the academic curriculum of Higher Education (see Jessop:2005, Jessop:forthcoming). This work is based on the experience of both our undergraduate and postgraduate programmes focusing particularly on the way in which students are encouraged to integrate the content of a variety of digital humanities courses and apply it to their own research project. In the case of the undergraduates this is developed in conjunction with their home department. These courses are designed to train not just the new generation of young scholars in our discipline but also the majority who will gain employment in a variety of professions in industry and commerce. Our students come from a range of disciplines and backgrounds within the humanities and what is highlighted in each case is the necessity to ensure that their projects meet the scholarly criteria of their home disciplines and the interdisciplinary aspects of humanities computing. This emphasises the need for training the students in collaborative method and refl ective practice; the need to build a community of learning which will lead to a community of practice. This paper discusses recent research and initiatives within distance learning, focussing on how these can be repurposed for campus-based courses, and is illustrated by the fi ndings of their use in a digital humanities course. Context There have been a number of initiatives that are pertinent to this topic. The published report on the accomplishments of the Summit on Digital Tools for the Humanities convened in 2005 at the University of Virginia (http://www.iath.virginia. edu/dtsummit/ ) identifi ed areas where innovative change was taking place that could lead to what they referred to as “a new stage in humanistic scholarship”. The style of collaboration enabled by digital learning community tools is identifi ed as one such area. This has been further reinforced at the National Endowment of the Humanities hosted Summit Meeting of Digital Humanities Centers and Funders held in April 2007 at the University of Maryland. (https://apps.lis.uiuc.edu/wiki/display/DHC/Digital+Humanitie s+Centers+Summit ) On the summit wiki among the areas of research priorities and funder priorities John Unsworth lists: • Collaborative work • Teaching and learning • Collaboration among scholars (https://apps.lis.uiuc.edu/wiki/display/DHC/Areas+of+researc h+priorities%2C+funder+priorities ) Building communities of learning and developing strategies for collaborative working has been the subject of much study within the distance learning community (Anderson:2004, Brown:2006, Perry and Edwards:2005, Swan:2002, et al) and here it is argued that this also needs to be a consideration for campus-based academic programmes. The growing trend among undergraduate programmes of a movement away from set courses to the introduction of modular and credit systems means that students no longer follow a single programme of study. Their time is fragmented between their chosen course options and they often only come together with their peers for ‘core courses’. Thus in the last two decades study has become more of an individual rather than community-based activity. This trend needs to be compensated for by teaching collaborative skills, the very same skills that are at the heart of the majority of digital humanities research projects. The ‘Community of Inquiry’ model (developed by Garrison, Anderson and Archer:2000 and 2004) draws out the basic elements which overlap to form the educational experience of the distance learner: social, cognitive, and teaching presence. This model is used as a framework to analyse the effectiveness of asynchronous discussion methodologies (which encourage refl ective practice), with particular regard for cognitive presence (where students construct meaning through communication with their peers, which is particularly important in the development of critical thinking), when used in campus-based courses. Building Networked Communities for Collaborative and Refl ective Teaching and Learning The highly collaborative nature of modern research practice makes it clear that future humanities scholars need to be trained in the collaborative process and to understand the importance of critical refl ection (Jessop:2005, Jessop:forthcoming). This emphasis on collaborative practice represents a shift in the academic culture of humanities away from the popular funding model of a single researcher towards one of team working where no single person has complete control or ownership. This is closer to models in operation in the sciences where progress is often based on team efforts and reports frequently have many authors; we may need to develop protocols that borrow some aspects of science research practice. The results of the author’s limited research into the effectiveness of the collaborative process in medical research practice are also to be included in this study. To develop an environment that fosters collaboration and refl ection students should be actively encouraged to engage with each other both inside and outside of the classroom. With social software (MySpace, Facebook, LiveJournal, inter alia) students are already building networked communities, and the blog and wiki have provided educators with simple, readily available tools to build learning communities. The wiki can be deployed as an experiential and formative learning environment outside of the classroom with students able to create their own content, comment on each others, and share resources using tools like del.icio.us and MyIntute. The blog supports this with a less formal refl ective space which belongs to the students themselves rather than their course. The asynchronous nature of these media gives students the opportunity to refl ect on their classmates’ contribution in the processes of creating their own (Swan:2000) and so instil the practice of critical refl ection. Further, with simple applications such as MyYahoo and iGoogle students can draw all their varied networks together along with course and departmental webpages thus giving a single interface or ‘Personal Learning Portal’ (PLP) through which to access and manage their online resources. In their PLP students create a web interface for their own digital environment that includes: • Content management where they integrate both personal and academic interests • A networking system for connection with others • Collaborative and individual workspace • Communications setup • A series of syndicated and distributed feeds This model is based on a presentation given by Terry Anderson at the Centre for Distance Education, University of London in March 2007: http://www.cde.london.ac.uk/support/news/generic3307. htm). In this Anderson discusses how the Personal Learning Environment (PLE), such as that used at Athabasca, is an improvement on the popular Virtual Learning Environment (VLE). That argument is developed here with stress upon the further advantages of the PLP introduced earlier. What is notable is that this model represents an approach rather than a specifi c application and is portable and not dependant on a single department or even institution. This ensures sustainability as it allows and encourages students to take the tools and skills from one area and apply them in others (arguably the basis of humanities computing, see McCarty and Short:2002). At the same time it puts the emphasis for the responsibility for managing their own learning and web resources on the students. In this approach learners are encouraged to interact and collaborate in a way that does not occur when static webpages are viewed with a traditional browser. The pages on a wiki and the student’s PLP are dynamic and mutable as they can be edited by the user through their web browser. Learners gain the ability to enrich the material and, unlike a print publication where those annotations are only for personal use, make these available for others. Such exchanges of ideas are central to the processes of building communities of learning and it is in this way that knowledge grows as we are able to push the boundaries of scholarship. The model that is developing here is one in which the student moves from being a reader of other peoples’ material to active engagement with that material; a transition from being a ‘reader’ to being an ‘interpreter’. Conclusion Education is an academic, individual, and a social experience that requires a sustainable community of learning. The tools and experiences developed in the distance learning fi eld can be re-purposed for the ‘analogue’ students. The suggested model based on the student’s PLP is grounded in collaborative practice, uses asynchronous discussion to develop refl ective practice and ensure cognitive presence; it is sustainable and portable. Putting this in the wider context, it is by building a community of learners that we will instil the cooperative, collaborative, and refl ective skills needed for a community of humanities scholars; skills that are equally in demand outside of the academy. The tools have already been subject to limited trials in the digital humanities programmes at King’s College London but the current academic year will see a more extensive application of them across our teaching. The fi nal version this paper will report on the results of the experiences of both teachers and learners of this model applied to a humanities computing course. The work contributes to the pedagogy of the digital humanities in the academic curricula both within the teaching of humanities computing and the development of tools for collaborative research and on-line learning communities.