The purpose of this presentation is to demonstrate the research opportunities that the TTC-ATENEA system offers to specialists in Art Theory. Principally, we will focus on those functionalities that are able to assist specialists in the interpretation of the theoretical discourses, a complex task due to the ambiguity and inaccuracy that distinguish this type of artistic terminology. Introduction The TTC-ATENEA system is currently being developed under my supervision in a Project supported by the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia of Spain called Desarrollo de un tesauro terminológico conceptual (TTC) de los discursos teórico-artísticos españoles de la Edad Moderna, complementado con un corpus textual informatizado (ATENEA) (HUM05-00539). It is an interdisciplinary project integrated by the following institutions: University of Málaga (Spain), University of de Santiago de Compostela (Spain), University of Valencia (Spain), European University of Madrid (Spain), the Getty Research Institute (Los Angeles, EE.UU.), the University of Chicago (EE.UU.) and the Centro de Documentación de Bienes Patrimoniales of Chile. Also, it maintains a fruitful collaboration with the Department of Computational Languages and Sciences of the University of Málaga, specifi cally with the Project called ISWeb: Una Infraestructura Básica para el Desarrollo de La Web Semántica y su Aplicación a la Mediación Conceptual (TIN2005-09098-C05-01). This system can be defi ned as a virtual net made up of two complementary components: an electronic text database (ATENEA), and the terminological conceptual thesaurus (TTC). The TTC is a knowledge tool for art specialists that consists of a compilation of described, classifi ed and linked terms and concepts. The textual database consists of important art-historical texts (16th -18th centuries), encoded in XMLTEI (1), that supply the terms and concepts recorded in the thesaurus (2). We want to remark the signifi cant contribution of ATENEA database to the fi eld of the virtual and digital libraries in Spain. Despite the fact that the building of digital and virtual libraries is an important area of development (3), ATENEA represents one of the fi rst textual databases about specialized subject matter –with exception of the digital libraries on literary texts- (4). It is a very different situation from other contexts, where we fi nd relevant specialized electronic textual collections. It is the case, for example, of the digital libraries about Italian artistic texts developed and managed by Signum (Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa) (5); or the collections included in the ARTFL Project (University of Chicago) (6). Providing Solutios to the Ambiguity of Art-theoretical Terminology The confi guration of the ATENEA-TTC system was determined by the main purpose of the project itself--that is, to provide a satisfactory answer to the terminological/conceptual problems that encumber the task of conducting research in art theory, due to the high degree of semantic density of the terminology contained in historical documents. In this respect, it is important to point out that the objective of the Project is not only to distinguish the terminological polysemy, that is, the different concepts that a term denotes (i.e., disegno as product, disegno as abstract concept, disegno as formal component of the paintings…), but also the different interpretations that the same concept assumes in discourses belonging to different authors. For instances, the concept disegno, understood as an abstract concept, has not the same interpretation in Zuccaro´s treatise than in Vasari´s one, what implies that the term disegno does not mean exactly the same in such texts. Indeed, this is one of the more problematic aspects of textual interpretation, since the same term assumes different semantic nuances in each text or treatise, increasing, in that way, the possibilities for ambiguity and error. In connection with this question, the eminent Professor Fernando Marías (7) has suggested the development of a “cronogeografía” of the art-theoretical concepts and terms. In his words, the so-called “cronogeografía” should be a precise means of control of the emergence and use of the theoretical vocabulary as well as of the ideas behind this. We consider that the methodology proposed by this Project could be an answer to Professor Marías´ suggestion. It is clear that this approach requires, fi rstly, a comparative conceptual analysis among the artistic texts stored in ATENEA in order to identify the different interpretations of each concept and, as a result, the semantic variations assumed by every term. To make visible in the thesaurus these semanticconceptual distinctions, we have proceeded to tag concepts and terms by mean of parenthetical qualifi ers related to authors, which have been specifi cally developed to this end. These qualifi ers specify the author who has used or defi ned them. Thus, the TTC records the conceptual-semantic variations among concepts and terms used by different authors, and also shows them graphically and visually. For example, the following representation generated by the system (fi gure 1): Fig. 1. Uses and interpretations of vagueza in the Spanish art –theory (17th century). reveals us, at a glance, that vagueza has the same interpretation in Sigüenza and Santos´s discourses, but that this assumes other senses in Carducho and Martinez´s treatises. This procedure implies other signifi cant feature of the ATENEA-TTC system: that terms and concepts are described in the TTC according to how they has been used or defi ned in each particular text. This last point deserves to be emphasized. Effectively, there are other projects that also link terms to online dictionary entries, in which the user fi nds general defi nitions of the terms. Nevertheless, in the TTC terms and concepts are defi ned in reference to the specifi c texts in where they have been located. So, clicking on the selected term or concept, the user gets information about how such term or concept has been specifi cally used and defi ned in a particular text or by a particular author. In addition to that, the TTC-ATENEA system provides full interaction between the ATENEA corpus and the TTC. The system easily allows the defi nition of connections between a term or a concept in an XML-TEI marked text and the registry of the TTC. Thus, terms and concepts in the text are linked to all their relevant information, stored and structured in the TTC records. In the same way, the system allows to establish a connection between terms and concepts registered in the TTC and the different places where they appear in the XMLTEI marked texts. As far as XML-TEI marked texts and TTC are stored in the same database, we can establish these links in a totally effective and effi cient way without having to access to different data repositories to retrieve and link this information. Consequently, one of the most important potentialities of the system as a research tool derives from the interactions that users are able to establish among the different types of information compiled in each repository. Finally, future extensions of the TTC-ATENEA will study the possibility of use not only a thesaurus but a full fl edged OWL [7] ontology and its integration in the Khaos Semantic Web platform [8] [9] [10] in order to achieve a formal explicit representation of the artistic epistemology contained in the texts. Research Possibilities The system allows users to retrieve the stored information from both terminological-conceptual and textual repositories. Nevertheless, as indicated above, the most important research possibilities derive from the interactions that users are able to establish between each repository. To illustrate this, we will give a brief example. 1. ATENEA Corpus as a starting point. Imagine that a specialist is interested in studying the meanings of the terms used by the Italian author F. Pacheco in his Spanish treatise (Diálogos de la Pintura, 1633). ATENEA Corpus enables the specialist to visualize the electronic transcription of the text, and explore it linguistically by means of different queries - concordances, frequency lists, co-occurrences…- since the system has been implemented with its own textual analyzer. These functionalities do not constitute any novelty; all we know that. Consequently, the most relevant feature resides in the fact that the system allows user to browse directly from a term or concept located in a text to the TTC record where such term or concept is described according to its use in Carducho´s text (fi gure 2). Fig. 2. Connection between a concept in an XML-TEI marked text (ATENEA) and the TTC record, where it is described. In this way, the specialist is able to identify the precise senses that the terms used by Carducho assume, and, therefore, analyze with more accuracy his theory about the painting. Once the specialist has accessed to the TTC records, the system offers him other research possibilities given that the recorded information is linked to other sections of the TTC as well as to other texts stored in ATENEA. Thus, the specialist is able to go more deeply in his investigation and to get complementary information browsing through the site. The presentation will show some clarifying examples of these other possibilities. 2. TTC as a starting point. Imagine now that the specialist is interested in the use of a particular term. In this case, the most convenient is to search the term in the TTC. Made the query, the specialist retrieves the different concepts associated to the term, as in a conventional specialized dictionary. However, as the term is marked with the author-parenthetical qualifi ers, the specialist also fi nds out in which discourses the term has been identifi ed denoting each concept (see fi gure1). In fact, various hyperlinks enable him to go from the TTC record to the exact point of the texts -stored in ATENEA- where the term appears denoting such concepts (fi gure 3). Fig. 3. Connection between a concept registered in the TTC and the places where they appear in the XML-TEI marked texts. Once in ATENEA Corpus, the specialist has the opportunity to use its functionalities in order to specify his investigation. The presentation will show in full detail these possibilities of usage derived from this interactivity-based approach, and will include time for Q&A. We believe that the questions taken into consideration in our exposition will be of interest to other humanistic disciplines, since the diffi culties of textual interpretations due to the terminological ambiguity is a common place in the fi eld of the Humanities.