Galleries, libraries, archives, and museums (GLAMs) increasingly seek to make digitized and born-digital collections accessible as data optimized for computational methods and tools common to the Digital Humanities. Preparation and publication of collections as data extends possible collection use beyond the analog object interactions that collection interfaces tend to try and emulate. In line with open data efforts, libraries, archives, and museums typically work to assign open licenses to these data. Current access methods are widely divergent, spanning simple provision of compressed collection objects in ZIP files, exposing static collection websites that can be crawled using a tool like rsync, leveraging Github for text collection access, provisioning an API, enabling FTP access to collections, mediating computational processes performed on collection data through a platform, to facilitating data access through use of torrent technology. Concurrently, in response to researcher requests for data-mining, commercial publishers have developed a range of processes for delivering proprietary corpuses with terms and conditions that significantly limit or expressly forbid data sharing, including providing libraries with physical hard drives loaded with the data. There are no consensus-driven best practices that guide the generation, description, and provisioning of computationally amenable GLAM collections for the range of communities that fall within the Digital Humanities. Without best practices in this space, institutions run the risk of misplaced investment of resources that foster the creation of irregular, ultimately disorienting data access environments. Indeed , the panoply of institutional approaches poses a challenge to GLAM institutions seeking best practices and clear guidelines for publishing collections as data. One major barrier to the development of consensus driven best practice is an incomplete understanding of how digital humanists, among others, are using and reusing cultural heritage data. This workshop aims to make progress towards bridging that gap. Research indicates that types of use exhibited by digital humanists include but are not limited to text analysis, image analysis, mapping, sound analysis, and network analysis. Orientation to the full scope of academic use types can be gained through in-depth analysis of data use practices across disciplines as represented in core Digital Humanities journals (Padilla and Higgins 2016), by reviewing works at the annual global Digital Humanities conference (Weingart 2016), and by studying edited volumes that have to this point effectively compiled a broad range of research in this space (Gold 2012; Gold and Klein 2016; Burdick, Drucker, Lunen-feld et al 2012; Schreibman, Siemens, Unsworth 2016). This workshop will build upon this orientation by engaging directly with digital humanists' existing and projected research and pedagogical practices that draw upon ever growing GLAM collections. Blending short talks by practitioners, guided discussion, and workshopping of the organizers' draft framework (further described below), the workshop will focus on how researchers and educators use GLAM collections that have been made accessible as data, and will extend to consider how these uses should inform collection creation and access.