  1. Introduction  In a letter that Willa Cather wrote in response to a reader's critique in 1924, she claims:“I had a perfectly good reason for writing ‘Antonia’ in the first person,  masculine—and I did not for one minute try to ‘talk like a man’. Such a  thing as humbugging any one never occurred to me. It does not matter who tells a story. It is merely a point of view, a position which the  writer takes in regard to his material...”.1 Looking into an author’s unpublished writings for additional insight is an  analytic strategy with a long history in literature studies. With  selections from Willa Cather’s extensive collection of correspondences  now available for study, scholars are presented with the opportunity to  compare Cather’s private letters with her published novels. A  statistical examination of Cather’s letters has, until recently, been  impossible; until the 2013 publication of The Selected Letters of Willa Cather, Cather’s letters were not available to the public.2 The publication of the letters offers a glimpse into the private life  of Cather, a life that she kept carefully guarded. The collection  contains approximately 550 letters, spanning her life from age 14 until  just days before her death. While Cather often spent years working on  her published writings, the fact that many of her correspondences were  hurriedly dashed off indicates that an examination of the letters could  reveal a style of writing that is less polished, worked, and  intentional. The potential applications of  this type of statistical analytic in literature studies as a whole are  wide reaching. Many authors have left behind extensive collections of  personal writing that could hold untapped insight about how they  communicated in different settings, and how their writing evolved. By  using similar tools to those we utilized in this exploratory research of Cather, scholars can continue to quantify the suppositions that  traditional methods of literary analysis have yielded. 2. Methodology Our research was divided into two main tasks. First, we  established a “personal voice signal” from Cather’s correspondence. To  derive a quantitative signal, we narrowed the available letters down to  164 letters using the hclust() function in R (For additional  information, see http://www.r-project.org/.). Setting the number of  clusters to 18, we chose the cluster that contained the highest  percentage of letters addressed to distinctly personal correspondents.  The personal signal was created by using a mean frequency threshold to  determine a set of frequently used words in the corpus of letters. In  the tradition of Burrows and others working in authorship attribution,  we elected to measure style based on the occurrence of high frequency  word features.34 This allowed us to both avoid arbitrarily selecting words, and to avoid using any context-sensitive words in our signal.5 It is likely that the 15 frequency features, or function words, that we selected are also less dependent on an author’s conscious decision to  vary his or her vocabulary.6 Thus, function words might offer a better indication of the  subconscious, intrinsic choices that inform a writer’s voice. It was our initial expectation that Cather’s personal voice signal would differ  from the narrative voices present within her novels. Our initial  research question revolved around the relationship between private and  public authorship: how (if at all) did Cather’s fiction act as a  mouthpiece for her personal voice? Once we  generated a signal from Cather’s letters, we used a clustering function  in R to compare the signal with 15 of her novels. In order to compare  Cather’s novels with the personal voice signal derived from her  correspondences, we used R to calculate two statistical measures of  similarity: correlation coefficient and Euclidean distance. These two  units of measure compare the similarity between Cather’s personal voice  signal and her use of function words in the corpus of novels. Examining  the Euclidean distance (with the dist() function) provides a way to  calculate the numerical distance between the frequency of the function  words within the personal correspondences and the frequency of the same  set of function words within each of the five novels. The correlation  coefficient measures the linear dependence between the function words in the correspondences and the function words in each novel. We divided  each of the novels into 1,000 word chunks in order to track the extent  to which portions of the novels were more similar to Cather’s personal  voice than others. In order to calculate a unique Euclidean distance for each novel, as opposed to its parts, we averaged the distances for all  the 1,000 word sections of each novel to determine a mean similarity  between each novel and Cather’s personal voice signal. 3. Observations While some of our findings on the similarity  between Cather’s personal voice signal and her use of function words  within her novels reaffirmed our initial hypotheses, some have defied  initial expectations. We found that Cather’s use of function words  within her novels was significantly different from the personal voice  signal calculated from the correspondences. However, the frequency of  function words did not vary significantly among 14 of the 15 novels we  examined, regardless of the gender of the narrator. This would indicate  that, while there is a difference between Cather’s “personal voice” and  14 of her published novels, certain aspects of the voice she adopts in  these novels remains constant regardless of the identity of the  narrator. We did identify a single outlier among Cather’s novels. The  frequency of function words within Cather’s novel My Mortal Enemy more closely resembles the use of frequency words in Cather’s correspondences than any of the other novels we examined.7 My Mortal Enemy was published in 1926, approximately halfway through Cather’s  publishing career. Previous scholarly commentary on Cather has also  indicated thatMy Mortal Enemy is a singular book in her  fiction corpus. The novel focuses on two periods in the life of Myra  Henshawe and her husband, Oswald. The narrator, Nellie Birdseye, who  many scholars argue is modeled after Cather, acts primarily as a frame  for sharing the Henshawe’s story. It is widely considered to be the  embodiment of Cather’s own novelistic ideal, the novel demeuble.8 For  Cather, the novel demeuble was an evocative form of realism, stripped of unnecessary detail and embellishment. The unique style of narration  present in My Mortal Enemy raises interesting questions about similarities between this novel and Cather’s correspondences. If My Mortal Enemy embodies Cather’s own idealized notion of stripped bare, to the point  realism, than is it possible that Cather also adopted a similar style in her personal letters?  Interesting questions are also raised by the way in which My Mortal Enemydraws from Cather’s life. The novel’s autobiographical nature has largely  been shrouded in mystery since Cather carefully attempted to conceal the events and people that influenced her novels. Charles Johanningsmeier  has made one of the most thorough attempts at unraveling the  connections, tracing the novel’s influences to Cather’s history with the McClure family.9 In this sense, our work appears to support Cather  studies by backing up scholarly claims about autobiographical influence  with quantitative data. We believe that examining the relative  similarity or difference between the ‘voice’ of Cather’s letters and  fiction is relevant because of the claims she made. Based on comments  made in some letters, it appears that she perceived differences in her  writing that surpass the conventions of genre. If we assume that in  writing about deeply personal issues, an author is likely to lapse into a more personal style, our findings seem to support the claim that My Mortal Enemy was highly influenced by Cather’s personal life. This raises an  interesting question: does the use of autobiographical details in  Cather’s fiction indicate an unconscious use of a more personal style of writing?   4. Future Work In the future, we intend to deepen and expand  the traits that define the personal voice signal we are deriving from  Cather’s correspondences. Sentence length, structure, and the choice of  infrequently appearing vocabulary are all elements of a writer’s unique  voice. Our research team will be investigating the ways in which these  characteristics impact the relationship between Cather’s private letters and her published works.  It is  also our hope that the research we have begun will lead towards further  studies on the relationship between My Mortal Enemy and Cather’s  letters. In addition, since scholars recognize the main character from  My Mortal Enemy, Nellie, as modeled after Cather, future research might  begin to look specifically at the ways in which Cather’s personal voice  is associated with specific characters in her novels. This question  might again return to issues of gender; if it becomes clear that certain characters within Cather’s work speak in a way similar to Cather’s  personal voice, the next question should revolve around what these  characters have in common.    