In its ability to extract feature sets, relate texts within an abstract space, and semantically parse groups of texts, computational textual analysis has functioned primarily as a formalist intervention into literary study. When practitioners venture outside of the formal features of the texts themselves, it is author or date that serves as the point of contact between the text and its wider context. And yet, texts offer a rich history of reception: as different interpretive communities (Fish 1980) receive and reinterpret novels, poems or plays, they recontextualize the literary object to suit the particular socio-cultural goals of their period or nationality. Lacking detailed accounts of reading practices at large scales, even traditional practitioners of literary history have been unable to reconstruct the history of reception of even the most historically canonical texts. In this project, we leverage the ability of Digital Humanities to recover, at least provisionally , a large-scale history of textual reception by exploring the patterns of citation that reveal the attention paid to specific texts across their history as read-erly objects. How are certain canonical texts cited over time and what can the attention paid to different segments of texts with a rich reception history tell us about the reading or social practices of different historical periods? How do different groups of readers (particularly authors and critics) quote text differently as they make use of passages in their own writing? And how do specialists and non-specialists cite the same text differently? By exploring the locus of attention within a canonical text, both across groups of readers and across history, we provisionally reconstruct a historically and socially contingent map of a text's reception history. As Piper and Algee-Hewitt have argued in "The Werther Effect" (Piper and Algee-Hewitt 2014), practices of citation, the embedding of the language of a text within other works, can reveal patterns of reception even within a single author's corpus. In this project , we expand this approach multi-dimensionally, identifying passages of canonical works quoted in other novels, in critical articles by specialists and non-field specialists, and in a larger undifferentiated corpus of text. The scale of our analysis enables us to identify what parts of a text have received the most writ-erly attention overall and how that attention has been shaped over time. By moving from semantics to passages , we switch our attention from the intangible metrics of semantic similarity, to specific, quotation-level instances of citation that demonstrate specific attention to identifiable parts of our target texts. Drawing on work in sequence alignment by David Smith et al (2013) and Richard So et al. (forthcoming), we will therefore be able to explore patterns of attention that have been paid to a text by identifiable groups of readers. We argue that these patterns of citational-ity serve as a proxy for the reception of a text: while necessarily limited to readers who themselves were authors (or critics), they nevertheless represent an important category of reception available to analysis. To extract the quotations, we used Python's "dif-flib" module, wrapped up as a parallelized MPI program that runs on an HPC cluster. To compare any two individual texts-for example, when checking for passages from Hamlet inside of a novel from the Gale American Fiction corpus-the texts are first split into tokens and passed through a filter that removes a set of 200 stopwords. This speeds up the alignment algorithm (the high-frequency words that get pulled out make up a significant portion of the total words in any given text, producing shorter sequences) and also has the advantage of making the alignment process less sensitive to small changes in function words, which seem to get shuffled around or changed fairly frequently when a text is quoted. For example, a change from: And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning to