The elaboration of critical edition of sources basically includes the setting up of indexes. In the paper media, the index provides an overview of the content, and makes it possible to access directly a piece of information : the name of a place or a person in the case of index nominum, or a concept in the case of index rerum. Though, indexes are hardly ever integrated in electronic publishing and textual databases, and this can be easily explained. On the first hand, in most cases, the goal of such initiatives isn’t to propose critical editions of sources, but to gather vast amounts of texts. Search forms are the main access tool, and the primacy of full text used to make indexes seem useless. On the other hand, setting up an index is a long and fastidious work, and the cost is not affordable for commercial publishers. Though, even within the digital media, and particularly on the Web, indexing is a worthy effort. It can solve the problem of lemmatisation, which is very hard to proceed automatically on a medieval corpus, especially regarding the diversity of writings of the names of people and places. Moreover, the index provides an overview of the names that appear in the work, when in textual databases there is no way to have a global approach of the corpus. Today, we’re beginning to see on the Web real critical editions, that rely upon the original structure of this kind of scholarly work ; logically, they also include an index, since this is part of the academic tradition of critical edition. Through this approach, it is possible to outline innovative uses of indexes within the context of electronic publishing. While in the paper media the index was only a hard to use location tool, within hypertextual organisation of information, it becomes a quick access tool, gives the overview of the corpus when discovering it for the first time, and reveals new courses of reading. Beside some disparities between different works, an index is composed of four stable parts : • the entry • the different writings in the text corresponding to this entry • biographical and/or genealogical explanations • the location of occurrences in the text. Name indexes are often organized hierarchically, inducing links between entries. All this information represents a first interpretative layer. Though, the index is stuck in this purpose of finding and accessing information, and these data aren’t used to analyse the corpus. It would be possible to use this work as the basis of an ontology, which would be a common index for various works or corpus, playing a role similar to a list of authorities. A computer ontology, not to be confused with philosophical ontologies, allows to describe concepts and relations between these concepts. The advantage of an ontology over a relational database is to enable logical rules between concepts and relations, and to go further than the hierarchical classification traditionally used for indexes. For instance, the symmetric relation “ brother of ” and the property “ A is brother of B ” allows to automatically deduce the inference “ B is brother of A ”. Similarly, the relation “ child of ”, transitive to the relation “ parent of ”, and the property “ A is parent of B ” the inference “ B is child of A ” is deduced. This mechanism, for simple and obvious that it seems to a human being, is actually quite complex to reproduce in the context of information treatment automation. There are various languages to set up an ontology. The OWL language, defined by the W3C and based on RDF, allows, thanks to the XML syntax, a simple XSLT transformation of the data encoded in the corpus in XML towards the OWL ontology. To populate the ontology, we can use the XML structure of historical works encoded following the TEI DTD, to gather all the names of people and places indexed in a regular form, and the relation of these names with the documents in the corpus. For a corpus encoded with the P4 version of TEI, the empty tag <index/> can be used to locate a point in the text, but it is not possible to reuse the different forms of the indexed entries. On the contrary, the <persName> tag with the reg attribute allows to encode the name of a person and to indicate the regular form, and so is it with the <placeName> for places. Once we defined the structural framework on index entries, we can work on the intended structure of the ontology in order to represent social networks. The location of the occurrences of the entry in the corpus structured in XML allows to automatically create relations between names of persons and places, and the structural entities of the corpus. Thus we can also indicate the role or place of the persons : in the case of a charter, we can indicate if it’s the author of the juridical action, the beneficiary or a witness, for example. Finally, we have to add the relations between people and placing, basing ourselves upon the relations revealed by the document, or other primary or secondary resources. Three visualisation methods can be used to fully reveal the benefits of this approach. In the first place, a visualisation close to the presentation of traditional indexes is required in order to ensure the transition towards assimilation of the digital media by the scholars. Second, the ontology is proposed in a manner proper for giving an overview of the content : faceted navigation interfaces propose combined lists that allow the end-user to define by himself different courses in the corpus. Finally, the graphical visualisation reveals the full potential of the ontology. The graph makes the relations between people, documents and places tangible, as well as the relations types that have been defined. Thus we can unveil the social networks that exist in a hidden state in the documents. The visualisation in the form of a graph proves the usefulness of ontologies when encoding an index nominum. Because a relational database cannot show relations other than hierarchical, or deduce inferences of expressed relations, it cannot completely realise the modelling of social networks. On the contrary, an ontology allows this process and transforms the index from a classical access point into an real tool for analysing the corpus. The social networks revealed by the ontology in the graph form become easier to apprehend, and this will constitute, once this technology is implemented on significant historical corpus, an essential manner to study the presence of a group of people in a geographic space according to their relations. The setting up of the index nominum as an ontology relying on XML structured works shows how a technology like RDF can grow the interest of a well identified tool using the modelling of information.