Introduction Facsimile images form a major component in many digital editing projects. Well-known projects such as the Blake Archive [Eaves 2007] and the Rossetti Archive [McGann 2007] use facsimile images as the primary entry point to accessing the visually rich texts in their collections. Even for projects focused on transcribed electronic editions, it is now standard practice to include high-resolution facsimile. Encoding standards and text processing toolkits have been the focus of signifi cant research. Tools, standards, and formal models for encoding information in image-based editions have only recently begun to receive attention. Most work in this area has centered on the digitization and presentation of visual materials [Viscomi 2002] or detailed markup and encoding of information within a single image [Lecolinet 2002, Kiernan 2004, Dekhtyar 2006]. Comparatively little has been work has been done on modeling the large-scale structure of facsimile editions. Typically, the reading interface that presents a facsimile determines its structure. Separating the software used to model data from that used to build user interfaces has well-known advantages for both engineering and digital humanities practices. To achieve this separation, it is necessary to develop a model of a facsimile edition that is independent of the interface used to present that edition. In this paper, we present a unifi ed approach for representing linguistic, structural, and graphical content of a text as an Annotated Facsimile Edition (AFED). This model grows out of our experience with several digital facsimile edition projects over more than a decade, including the Cervantes Project [Furuta 2001], the Digital Donne [Monroy 2007a], and the Nautical Archaeology Digital Library [Monroy 2007b]. Our work on these projects has emphasized the need for an intuitive conceptual model of a digital facsimile. This model can then serve as the basis for a core software module that can be used across projects without requiring extensive modifi cation by software developers. Drawing on our prior work we have distilled fi ve primary goals for such a model: • Openness: Scholars’ focused research needs are highly specifi c, vary widely between disciplines, and change over time. The model must accommodate new information needs as they arise.  • Non-hierarchical: Facsimile editions contain some information that should be presented hierarchically, but they cannot be adequately represented as a single, properly nested hierarchy. • Restructuring: A facsimile is a representation of the physical form of a document, but the model should enable applications to restructure the original form to meet specific needs. • Alignment: Comparison between varying representations of the same work is a fundamental task of humanities research. The model must support alignment between facsimiles of different copies of a work. Annotated Facsimile Editions The Annotated Facsimile Edition (AFED) models the macro level structure of facsimile editions, representing them as a stream of images with annotations over that stream. Figure 1 shows a simplified diagram illustrating a two-volume edition of collected poems. Annotations encode the structure of the document and properties of the structural elements they represent. Separate annotation streams encode multiple analytical perspectives. For example, in fi gure 1, the annotations shown below the image stream describe the physical structure of the edition (volumes, pages, and lines) while the annotations shown above the image stream describe the poetic structure (poems, titles, epigraphs, stanzas). Annotations within a single analytical perspective—but not those from different perspectives—follow a hierarchical structure. The Image Stream The image stream intuitively corresponds to the sequential ordering of page images in a traditional printed book. These images, however, need not represent actual “pages.” An image might show a variety of artifacts including an opening of a book, a fragment of a scroll, or an unbound leaf of manuscript notes. While it is natural to treat facsimile images sequentially, any particular linear sequence represents an implementation decision—a decision that may not be implied by the physical document. For example, an editor may choose to arrange an edition of letters according to the date written, recipient, or thematic content. The image stream, therefore, is an implementation detail of the model. The structure of the edition is specifi ed explicitly by the annotations. Annotation Management Perspective Analytical perspective e.g., physical structure, narrative elements, poetic. Type The name of this type of annotation, e.g., page, volume, chapter, poem, stanza Start Index The index into the image stream where this annotation starts. Stop Index The index into the image stream where this annotation ends. Sequence A number for resolving the sequence of multiple annotations on the same page. Content Canonical Name A canonical name that uniquely identifi es this content relative to a domain specifi c classifi cation scheme. Display Name The name to be displayed when referring to an instance this annotation Properties A set of key/value pairs providing domain specifi c information about the annotation. Transcriptions A set of transcriptions of the content that this annotation specifi es. Structural Information Parent A reference to the parent of this annotation. Children A list of references to the children of this annotation Table 1: Information represented by an annotation. Many historical texts exist only as fragments. Many more have suffered damage that results in the lost of a portion of the original text. Despite this damage, the general content and characteristics of the text may be known or hypothesized based on other sources. In other cases, while the original artifact may exist, a digital representation of all or part of the artifact may unavailable initially. To enable scholars to work with missing or unavailable portions of a facsimile, we introduce the notion of an abstract image. An abstract image is simply a placeholder for a known or hypothesized artifact of the text for which no image is available. Annotations attach to abstract images in the same way they attach to existing images. Annotations Annotations are the primary means for representing structural and linguistic content in the AFED. An annotation identifi es a range of images and specifi es properties about those images. Table 1 lists the information specifi ed by each annotation. Properties in italics are optional. As shown in this table, annotations support three main categories of information: annotation management, content, and structural information. The annotation management and structural information categories contain record keeping information. Structural information describes the hierarchical structure of annotation within an analytical perspective. The annotation management category specifi es the annotation type and identifi es the image content referenced by the annotation. The sequence number is an identifi er used by AFED to determine the relative ordering of multiple annotations that have the same starting index. AFED is agnostic to the precise semantics of this value. The annotation type determines these semantics. For example, a paragraph annotation may refer to the paragraph number relative to a page, chapter, or other structural unit. The content category describes the item referenced by the annotation. Annotations support two naming conventions. To facilitate comparison between documents, an annotation may specify a canonical name according to a domain specifi c naming convention. Canonical names usually do not match the name given to the referenced item by the artifact itself and are rarely appropriate for display to a general audience. Accordingly, the annotation requires the specifi cation of a name suitable for display. Descriptive metadata can be specifi ed as a set of key/value properties. In addition to descriptive metadata, annotations support multiple transcriptions. Multiple transcriptions allow alternate perspectives of the text; for example, a paleographic transcription to support detailed linguistic analysis and a normalized transcription to facilitate reading. Transcriptions may also include translations. AFED’s annotation mechanism defi nes a high-level syntactical structure that is suffi cient to support the basic navigational needs of most facsimile projects. By remaining agnostic to semantic details, it allows for fl exible, project specifi c customization. Where projects need to support user interactions that go beyond typical navigation scenarios, these interactions can be integrated into the user interface without requiring changes to the lower-level tools used to access the facsimile. Discussion AFED has proven to be a useful model in our work. We have deployed a proof of concept prototype based on the AFED model. Several of the facsimile editions constructed by the Cervantes Project use this prototype behind the scenes. Given its success in these reader’s interfaces, we are working to develop a Web-based editing toolkit. This application will allow editors to quickly defi ne annotations and use those annotations to describe a facsimile edition. We anticipate completing this tool by the summer of 2008. By using multiple, hierarchical annotation streams, AFED’s expressive power falls under the well-studied class of document models, known as OHCO (ordered hierarchy of content objects). Specifi cally, it is an instance of a revised form of this generic model known as OHCO-3, [Renear 1996]. Whereas most prior research and development associated with the OHCO model has focused on XML-based, transcribed content, we have applied this model to the task of representing macro-level structures in facsimile editions. Focusing on macro-level document structure partially isolates the AFED model from the non-hierarchical nature of documents both in terms of the complexity of the required data structures, and in terms of providing simplifi ed model to facilitate system implementation. If warranted by future applications, we can relax AFED’s hierarchical constraint. Relaxing this constraint poses no problems with the current prototype; however, further investigation is needed to determine potential benefi ts and drawbacks. In addition to macro-level structures, a document model that strives to represent the visual content of a document for scholarly purposes must also account for fi ne-grained structures present in individual images and provide support for encoded content at a higher level of detail. We envision using the AFED model in conjunction with models tailored for these low-level structures. We are working to develop a model for representing fi ne-grained structure in visually complex documents grounded in spatial hypermedia theory.