The Digital Humanities Summer Institute, or DHSI, provides "an ideal environment for discussing and learning about new computing technologies and how they are influencing teaching, research, dissemination, creation, and preservation in different disciplines, via a community-based approach" (DHSI). What began in 2001 as a small event at Malaspina University-College is now an annual 2-week affair at the University of Vic-toria which offers dozens of sessions and attracts a global audience. The growth of DHSI over the past 16 years mirrors the larger development of digital humanities as an academic (inter)discipline that has shifted from a niche endeavor for computational linguists and technology early-adopters to both a mainstream methodological approach and a distributed community of practitioners. DHConnections examines DHSI attendance data. This website functions both as a tool for research about DHSI (and thus the history of disciplinary training in the digital humanities), and as a platform for DHSI alumni to connect with other researchers with similar interests, or to reconnect with contacts from previous DHSI sessions. In this way, DHConnections intersects with the "Collaborators" component of center-Net's excellent DH Commons website, but is more explicitly focused on the distributed community of DHSI alumni. The DHSI organizational team maintains an archive of past DHSI sessions and participants. With the permission of DHSI and the Electronic Textual Cultures Laboratory at University of Victoria, I scraped this collection and cleaned it with OpenRefine to remove typographical errors, standardize attendee and organization names, and validate the data. There is no participant data (only instructors) for 2001-2003, but since 2004 there is an accurate list matching every attendee to the session he or she attended. This information is further broken out by role-student, instructor, speaker, or staff, with numerous specific subcatego-ries of each. From 2006 onward, attendee institutional and organizational affiliations are also included. I also built a controlled vocabulary of DH topics and manually added topics to each session based on the session title and abstract when available. Together, these components form a temporal, topical, spatial, and biographical dataset which captures the attendance data for 2,678 individuals who collectively attended 254 sessions across 4,932 instances. DHConnections allows users to access and interpret this dataset. Researchers can access the raw data via a JSON endpoint, but DHConnections also features numerous interactive interfaces which provide intuitive ways to understand the growth of DHSI through what Joanna Drucker calls "visual epistemologies … ways of knowing that are presented and processed visually" (2014, 8). These include a searchable table of all participants ; charts of the growth of DHSI over time by country, and by total institutional attendance; a face-table map of participants' institutional affiliations; a graph which examines the popularity of DHSI session topics and when they were introduced (figure 1); and a searchable network graph of participants, linked by session attendance, scaled by frequency, and color-coded by participant role. These and other visualiza-tions provide information about the growth of an international DH and DHSI constituency, identify major contributors and organizations within the field, and assist DH researchers interested in finding contacts.