This paper documents an exploratory research in progress, investigating the relationship between the quality of digital interfaces, their technical conditions and the interfacial mediation of the users’ body. Here, we focus on the bodily dimension of gender. For this reason, we analysed two online role playing games with different representation modes (text-based versus image-based) asking which impact the digital interface and their technical conditions have on gender performances. Following sociological investigations (Bahl, 1998/ Goffman, 2001/ Lübke, 2005/ Müller, 1996), the bodily aspect of gender plays a central role in communication settings due to its social, cultural meaning which nowadays strongly is mediated by information technology. For this reason, we focus on the interfaces. We claim that their representation mode, their design and software constraints have a crucial impact on the virtual patterns of gender referring to individual performance, spatial movement and communication. This interfacial analysis is just a part of an interdisciplinary inquiry about the interrelation between gender, design and ICT. It is allocated in the overlapping fi eld of sociology, gender studies, design research and information technology. In this respect, we regard the body and its gender as culturally constructed interface of social interactions and advocate for refl ecting it within the process software development and interface design. Introduction Today’s communication is highly infl uenced by information technology, which substitutes more and more physical body representations in face-to-face communication. Disembodied experiences have become a part of ordinary life as self performances and interactions are often mediated by designed hardware and software interfaces. In this context, designers who make ICT accessible via their product and screen designs can be regarded as mediators between technological requirements and user needs. They usually regard interfaces from the point of view of formal-aesthetic (Apple Computer, Inc, 1992; McKey, 1999; Schneiderman/ Plaisant, 2005), or of usability (Krug, 2006; Nielsen/ Loranger, 2006) and interaction-design (Cooper/ Reimann, 2003; Preece/ Rogers/ Sharp, 2002). But designers not only make ICT usable, but also culturally signifi cant. In this respect, they also deal with the cultural constructions and implications of gender which have to be refl ected by their screen designs. The interfacial conditions decide about the bodily representations in ICT interaction. By referring to interactionist (Goffman, 2001), constructivist (Butler, 2006/ Teubner, Wetterer, 1999/ Trettin, 1997/ West, Zimmermann, 1991, 1995) theories and sociological investigations of virtual environments (Eisenrieder, 2003/ Lübke, 2005/ Turkle, 1999), we claim that the bodily aspect of gender is an essential reference point of individual performance, communication, even spatial movements not as a physical property of the body, but due to its cultural meaning and connotative potential. It is supposed to be the most guiding information referring to interaction contexts (Goffman, 2001/ Lübke, 2005). It has a crucial impact on the behavior: Being polite, e.g. opening the door for someone is often a decision made in dependence of the counterpart’s gender (Müller, 1996). Not knowing about it causes behavioral confusion (Bahl, 1998/ Lübke, 2005). Research Perspectives & Research Questions In contrast to a sociological point of view, a conventional design perspective or technological requirements, we add a completely new aspect to design and technologically driven inquiries in two respects: - By taking the body as a benchmark for analyzing gender representations of digital interfaces. - By investigating the virtual body and its gender representations from an interfacial point of view. Our investigations and refl ections are guided by the following questions: - Which gender images do exist in virtual spaces? - Which impact do the digital interface and their technical conditions have on gender performances? Furthermore, we are particularly interested in knowing about the impact of design on preserving traditional and stereotype gender images as well as on modifying or deconstructing them. Objects of Investigation Objects of investigations are two online role playing games, so called Multi User Dungeons (MUDs). They are especially suitable for this purpose because they directly refer to bodily representations in form of virtual characters. We choose two MUDs with different representation modes in order to compare the effects of opposite interfaces on the virtual embodiment of gender: LambdaMOO, a popular text-based online role playing game (see Image 1 LM), is contrasted with Second Life, the currently most popular and populated graphical MUD (see Image 1 SL). Examining their interfaces promise to get concrete insights into the interfacial infl uence on virtual gender images. Methodology We use the methods of content analysis and participatory observation – the fi rst in order to explore the interfacial offer of options and tools to create virtual gender representations and the second in order to know, how it feels developing and wearing the respective gendered skin. The analysis and observations are guided and structured using the different dimensions of the body as a matrix of investigating which are empirically generated from the observations themselves. Within these bodily categories, different aspects of gender are identifi ed: Body presence - modes of existence or being there Personality / individuality - forms of personal performance - forms of non-verbal communication (facial expressions, gestures, vocal intonations and accentuation) - modes of emotional expressions Patterns of gender - categories or models of gender Actions and spatial Movements - modes of behavior and actions - modes of spatial orientation and navigation Patterns of social behavior - modes of communication and interaction - community standards, behavioral guidelines and rules Research Results The main fi ndings show, how interfaces and their specifi c technical conditions can expand or restrict the performance of gender. Moreover, they demonstrate how the conventional bipolar gender model of western culture can be re- and deconstructed by the interfacial properties and capacities. The table below gives a summarizing overview about how the different bodily aspects are treated by the respective interface of LambdaMOO or Second Life. Interfacial elements which explicitly address gender aspects are indicated in bold italics. Reference to images are marked “see Image # LM (LambdaMOO)/SL(Second Life)”. The comparison demonstrates that both interfaces use nearly the same patterns of embodiment. Referring to the bodily aspect of gender, Second Life is a poor and conservative space. Gender modifi cations besides the common model seem not to be intended by the interface: In case of gender switches the gender specifi c gestures set does not shift correspondently (see images 11.1 SL and11.2 SL). In contrast to that, LambdaMOO questions the analogue gender model by violating and expanding it up to 10 categories. Outlook This inquiry belongs to a design research project which generally deals with the relation between gender and design. It aims at the development of a gender sensitive design approach investigating the potential of gender modifi cation and deconstruction by design.