The Septuagint is in many ways a remarkable collection of texts. It represents the first known attempt to translate the Hebrew Bible into an Indo-European language, namely Hellenistic Greek. As such, it functions as an invaluable source for understanding pertinent linguistic, translational, text-critical, socio-cultural, and philosophical-theological issues that led to its creation and reception. Spanning in its inception from the first translations in the early- to mid-third century BCE to the later revisions in the second century CE, it gives scholars an insight not only into the development of the Greek language, but also into the influence of a Semitic language on its vocabulary and possibly even its syntax. Furthermore, being one of the rare cases where both a translated Greek text and the Semitic source text are extant, it also offers a rich source of insight into contemporary translation techniques and philosophies, albeit influenced by its hagiographic status, and helps in establishing the possibility of a clearer understanding of other Greek texts that are generally deemed to be translations from Semitic originals. Last, but not least, is its reflection of the culture and ideology of diaspora communities in the eastern Mediterranean metropoles, which led to the emergence and shaping of two important religious groupings. The Septuagint is also amongst the ancient texts to receive early concerted applications of Humanities Computing approaches. The most prominent project in this line is the Computer Assisted Tools for Septuagint Studies (CATSS) project, which was called into life through the initiative of the International Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies in the early 1970s. Located at the University of Pennsylvania’s emerging Center of Computer Analysis of Texts (CCAT), this project sought the use of computing resources towards three goals: (1) a morphological analysis of the Greek text, resulting in a tagged electronic text, (2) the comparison of Hebrew and Greek texts, resulting in an electronic parallel aligned Hebrew and Greek text, and the recording of published critical variants, resulting in an electronic Greek texts, with variants encoded. All these texts are now freely available (upon the signing of a user agreement/declaration) at the CCAT’s gopher and form the basis of most, if not all, current Septuagint projects and studies making use of computing. Departing from this pioneering, indispensable, and foundational application of Humanities Computing approaches to the study of the Septuagint, this paper will present an appraisal of the Humanities research questions presently asked of these texts, on the one hand, and of the potential of applying Humanities Computing in answering them, on the other. Beyond the widely agreed proposals of transforming such resources into established formats, e.g. Unicode for character encoding and TEI XML for text encoding, I will seek to discuss concrete problems and possibilities in pursuing Humanities Computing applications to the Septuagint, while generalising some of the insights within a wider context. The wider question will be: What should be done to and with electronic text(s) of the Septuagint in order to enrich it as a resource for answering the philological, historical, socio-cultural, and theological questions currently asked about it? One of the aims of this paper will be to tease out the current disciplinary boundaries between traditional Humanities approaches and emerging Humanities Computing ones and to identify important developments in their relationship. An important presupposition in this discussion will be the understanding that Humanities Computing, as a hybrid discipline, will only be truly successful if it reflects a thorough understanding of both Humanities research questions and Computing approaches and develops a balanced negotiation of models and concepts that successfully bridge between the two. The direction of proposing research questions has to be pursuit in both directions – both ‘how can one exploit Computing approaches to answer Humanities questions?’ and ‘How do Computing approaches alter the Humanities questions we ask about a research object?’ have to be asked. To push further the metaphor in the name of the aforementioned CATSS project: It is a matter of using computing approaches as collaborators, rather than as mere assistants. There are a number of issues in the case of the Septuagint that complicate straightforward conceptual models. To choose but one illustration: Both the textual bases of Hebrew source text and Greek translation text are disturbed not only by the textual variants on each side, but also by the fact that the Septuagint texts soon encountered rival Greek translations, in some cases clearly influencing later revisions. Furthermore, the Hebrew source text for the Septuagint clearly departs occasionally from the Hebrew Masoretic Text. Moreover, the Septuagint also includes a number of apocryphal books, some of which were probably written directly in Greek. It is evident that the conceptual model to deal with this scenario cannot just consist of the juxtaposition of two clearly delimited texts. But how does one model such a complicated picture and how does one approach such a picture by computational means? This paper will attempt to propose some answers to this question. It will seek to do so by sketching an ontology and incipit model to accommodate the complication. As an example of the wider context dealt with in this paper, I will discuss another, more general current development in Humanities research projects, not least influenced by contemporary communication technologies: the collaborative nature of the research undertaken. While the negotiation of consensus remains a crucial achievement and necessity in such endeavours, what are we to do with disagreement? How do we encode minority opinions and use them as a resource in computational approaches? If the underlying arguments are important: How do we record them for both agreements and disagreements?