A collaboration between the National Archives in the UK, the History and Centre for Computing in the Humanities departments at King’s College London, the Henry III Fine Rolls project (http://www.frh3.org.uk) has produced both a digital and a print edition (the latter in collaboration with publisher Boydell & Brewer) [1] of the primary sources known as the Fine Rolls. This dual undertaking has raised questions about the different presentational formats of the two resources and presented challenges for the historians and digital humanities researchers involved in the project, and, to a certain extent, for the publisher too. This paper will examine how the two resources evolved: the areas in which common presentational choices served both media, and areas in which different presentational choices and production methodologies were necessary. In so doing, this paper aims to build a solid foundation for further research into the reading practices and integrated usage of hybrid scholarly editions like the Henry III Fine Rolls. Presentation as interpretation In Material Culture studies and, in particular, in studies of the book, the presentational format of text is considered to be of fundamental importance for the study of production, social reading and use. Therefore, description of and speculation about the physical organisation of the text is essential of understanding the meaning of the artefact that bears that text. Similarly, in Human Computer Interaction studies and in the Digital Humanities, the presentation of a text is considered to be an integral outgrowth of the data modelling process; a representation of the text but also to some degree an actualisation of the interpretative statements about the text. Indeed, to the eyes of the reader, the presentational features of both a printed book and a digital written object will not only reveal the assumptions and beliefs of its creators, but affect future analysis of the work. Dual publication: digital and print On the practical side, within the Henry III Fine Rolls project, different solutions of formatting for the two media have been negotiated and implemented. The print edition mainly represents a careful pruning of the digital material, especially as pertains to the complex structure of the indexes. The indexes were built upon the marked-up fi ne rolls texts and generated from an ontological framework (Ciula, Spence, Vieira, & Poupeau; 2007). The latter, developed through careful analysis by scholars and digital humanities researchers, constitutes a sort of an a posteriori system that represents familial networks, professional relationships, geo-political structures, thematic clusters of subjects, and in general various types of associations between the 13th century documents (the so called Fine Rolls) and the the roles played by places and people in connection with them. The ontology is used to produce a series of pre-coordinate axes (the indices) that the reader can follow to explore the texts. The fl exibility of the ontology allows the texts to be fairly exhaustively indexed, just as the presentational capabilities of the digital medium allow for the display and navigation of indexes that are correspondingly large. By contrast, the print edition had to follow the refi ned conventions of a well established scholarly tradition in publishing editions in general and calendar [2] editions in particular, both in terms of formatting and, more importantly for us, in terms of content selection/creation and modelling. Though the indices within the printed edition are also precoordinate axes along which to explore the text, the way in which they are produced is perceived to be a nuanced and intuitive aspect of the scholarship and one that revealed itself to be less tolerant to change.This, coupled with the presentational constraints of the printed medium result in indices that present information succinctly and with a minimum of conceptual repetition. Similarly, the fi rst print volume of around 560 pages gives absolute prominence -something that can be stated much more strongly in a linear publication than in a digital one- to a long and detailed historical introduction, followed by a section on the adopted editorial strategies. However, the two artefacts of the project also share many points in common, either because the digital medium had to mirror the tradition of its more authoritative predecessor, or for more practical -nevertheless not to be dismissed- reasons of work-fl ow and foreseen usage. An interesting example of the latter is the adopted layout of footnotes, where the print format was modelled on the base of the digital layout and, although it was a completely unusual arrangement, was accepted as suitable by the publisher. On the base of the work done so far and on the feedback on the use of the book and the website, the presentational format will be refi ned further for future print volumes to come and for the additional material to be included in the digital edition before the end of the project. One reading process On the methodological side, we believe that further research into the usage and reading process of these parallel publications could lead towards a better understanding of scholarly needs and therefore a better modelling of such a dual product that is becoming a more and more common deliverable in digital humanities projects. As this paper will exemplify, the presentation of data needs to be tailored to take into account the more or less fi ne conventions of two different media which have different traditions, different life cycles, different patterns of use and, possibly, different users. However, although very different in nature, these two publications are not necessarily perceived and – more importantly- used as separate resources with rigid boundaries between them. For a scholar interested in the fi ne rolls, the reading of the edition and the seeking of information related to it (persons, places, subjects and any other interesting clue to its historical study in a broader sense) is a global process that does not stop when the book is closed or the the browser shut. We believe that, when supported by a deep interest in the material, the connection between the two publications is created in a rather fl uid manner. The reality of the reading process and information seeking, as it happens, is infl uenced by the products it investigates, but ultimately has a form of its own that is different from the objects of analysis. It is dynamic and heterogeneous, it leaves on the integration between different types of evidence, no matter what their format is, including other kind of external sources. Indeed, the library or archive is the most likely environment where a scholar of the fi ne rolls would fi nd herself browsing the print or digital edition, eventually the original primary sources or their digital images, plus any range of secondary sources. Studying the integration of print and digital The data behind the two publications are drawn from the same informational substrate, but are separated to create two presentational artefacts. As established, reading is expected to be the primary activity performed using both and a stated design goal for the project is that the two artefacts will form a rich body of materials with which to conduct historical research.The heterogeneity of the materials, however, suggests that working with texts will of necessity also involve periods of information seeking: moments while reading that give rise to questions which the material at hand cannot answer and the subsequent process embarked upon in order to answer them. Our working hypothesis is that to fi ll these information gaps (Wilson, 1999), the reader will turn to particular texts in the alternative medium to fi nd answers, moving between the website and the books, fl uctuating between states of reading and seeking. Thus, the analytical stream in this paper will move from the practices of creating two types of resources to establishing an analytical framework for evaluating their use. Situating the project materials and domain experts within the literature of information behaviour research, we will identify and develop a model for evaluating how well the features of the website and the book support information seeking activities that bridge (Wilson, 1999) reading within the individual media. Conclusions Based on our experience in creating a hybrid edition for the Henry III Fine Rolls project, the challenges and adopted solutions for the two types of published resources are a starting point from which to refl ect on the integrated production of a dual object. At the same time, continuing work begun elsewhere in the digital humanities (Buchanan, Cunningham, Blandford, Rimmer, & Warwick; 2006) to adapt methodologies used in Information Science and Book Studies, a rationale and method for the design of an analysis of their use and, in particular, of the interaction between scholars and the website/books can be outlined.