While electronic databases have constantly improved as regards their quantitative and qualitative validity and relevance, compromises have sometimes been made in their tagging by relying on pre-corpus- linguistic grammatical descriptions, resorting to automatic (i.e., non-interactive) tagging, or imposing neat category labels on the data. One of the motivating factors in my present project, which aims at producing a web-based tagged corpus of Scottish letters (Corpus of Scottish Correspondence, 1500-1730, CSC), is my conviction that, besides ensuring the authenticity of data by digitising original manuscripts rather than editions, it is also necessary to create text annotation principles and methods appropriate for dealing with the great degree of linguistic variation and variability recorded in historical documents. Tagging may distort evidence by applying overly rigid rules in categorisation, so ignoring the inherent fuzziness of categories, and by simplifying complex patterns of variation or using tags that fail to reflect processes of change over a long time-span. These problems are particularly challenging in the tagging of corpora for the study of those regional and local varieties of English which may significantly differ from previously described standardised varieties. One of these is Scots, an internally quite heterogeneous variety. In my paper I will discuss variationist principles of tagging, focusing on how multiple category membership resulting from variation over time and space has been dealt with in the system applied to the CSC. The general practice is that the tag, consisting of a lexel and a grammel, provides descriptive information about structural and contextual properties, and may contain comments permitting, for example, semantic specification or disambiguation, but the properties listed in the tag do not suggest a straightforward categorisation. Instead, the tag indicates the variational pattern that the tagged item is a member of, allowing the creation of valid inventories for the study of the continual variation and change inherent in any variety, idiolectal, local, regional, or supraregional. In creating variationist typologies, the deciding factor is that variants in a particular typology have been observed to show patterning at a particular level of analysis, be it structural or syntactic, or related to communicative or text-structuring functions. Thus the textual, discoursal, sentential and clausal levels are distinguished from one another. For example, subordinators such as since, as, because and for (the first two in the role of cause) and connective adverbs such as therefore may be members of the same semantically defined inventory, but their membership of a syntactically defined group is not as straightforward as the traditional categorisation into conjunctions and adverbs would suggest. For in particular requires a careful analysis of the data. When the qualifications of these items for membership are assessed at the discoursal and textual levels, there is evidence that they are not members of the same patterns of variation (Meurman-Solin 2004a). Secondly, the system has been tailored to meet the challenge of tracing developments over a long time-span. This requires that the source of a particular item or collocate is kept transparent over time, even though a later grammaticalisation or reanalysis, for instance, would permit recategorisation. Thus, according to is tagged 'accord/vpsp-pr>pr and 'to/pr<vpsp-pr, seeing that 'see/vpsp-cj{c} and 'that/cj<, and exceedingly 'exceed/vpsp-aj-av and '-ly/xs-vpsp-aj-av, indicating that the ultimate source of all these is a present participle. Tags providing information about potential rather than established membership of categorial space are intended to ensure that comprehensive inventories can be created for examining the full scale of variation. For example, the tag for the variational pattern of upon (the) condition that includes upon this condition that ('condition/n-cj<pr), even though the determinative element this positions the variant at the end of the cline where an abstract noun followed by a nominal that-clause as the second unit would be analysed as an appositive structure. The approach to lexicalisation is the same. Consequently, in an invariable collocate such as anyway the two units are tagged separately, and their interrelatedness is indicated by arrows: 'any/aj>n-av and 'way/n-av<aj. The third factor stressed in the theoretical approach is the inherent fuzziness and polyfunctionality recorded in language use when examined by drawing on representative large-scale corpora. The tagging principles have been influenced by the discussion of notional or conceptual properties, elaborated tags making the interrelatedness of the members of a particular notional category explicit (Anderson 1997). Even though conventional part-of-speech labels are used in the tags, strings of such labels indicate fuzziness and polyfunctionality by referring to the co-ordinates of items on a cline, rather than insisting on membership of a single category. Concepts such as ‘nouniness’ and ‘adverbhood’ reflect this approach. Right honorable as a term of address is tagged 'right/av, 'honour/aj-n{ho}-voc and '-able/xs-aj-n{ho}-voc ({ho} commenting on the honorific function, ‘voc’ being an abbreviation of vocative). The tag type with two core category names combined by a hyphen (here aj-n) permits searches concerned with fuzziness or polyfunctionality. This practice can be illustrated by conform to, 'conform/aj-pr>pr and 'to/pr<aj-pr, and as soon as, 'as/av>cj 'soon/av-cj 'as/cj<av. Ambiguity is made explicit by using comments such as {syntactic ambiguity>} and {syntactic merger>}, which alert the user to re-examine the problematic structure that follows the comment. In applying the variationist approach to the reconstruction of historical language varieties, it is necessary to keep in mind that due to scarcity of texts, in the early periods in particular, there may be significant gaps in our knowledge base. Ideally, members of a particular pattern of variation have all been attested in the data as genuine alternatives, and can be related to one another by addresses provided by the tags. In practice, if only fragments are available, rather than a balanced and representative collection of texts, we will also have to deal with potential, though unattested, variants. In these cases, we must resort to typological information on corresponding systems in later periods, or those representing other languages or language varieties. Therefore, another essential ingredient in the theoretical approach is that zero realisations are included in variationist paradigms. There is a wide range of zero realisation types, and the tagging principles vary accordingly. Elliptical items, including features carefully discussed in grammars such as that-deletion, are indicated by comments such as {zero v}, {zero aux}, {zero that}, and {zero S}, while in the relative system both a comment and a tag introduced by a zero are used: {zero rel} followed by '/0RO{y1}, for instance. Since the explicit marking of semantic relations at various levels is a salient feature in early letters, zero marking being much less frequent in the historical data examined than in similar registers in Present-day English (Meurman-Solin 2004b), comments are also used to indicate the absence of logical connectors. It should be noted that, in principle, the term zero-realisation can be considered misleading, since it may not always be possible to verify empirically that something has been omitted. However, in the present approach a zero realisation is indicated when a variational pattern comprising explicitly expressed variants and those left implicit has been repeatedly attested in the data.