Background Since the beginning of Humanities Computing, text theory has been a fundamental issue. The question „What is text?“ has been repeatedly raised at ALLC/ACH conferences. One of the answers, “text is an ordered hierarchy of content objects” (the OHCO-model), has been dominating the discussion for a while and has laid ground for well-established and paradigmatic standards such as the TEI Guidelines. But there has also been criticism since the beginning which questioned this model from different perspectives (Buzzetti, McGann, Olsen, Caton, Huitfeld). Do we in fact have an unsolvable problem? As Jerome McGann puts it: “What is text? I am not so naïve as to imagine that question could ever be finally settled. Asking such a question is like asking ‘How long is the coast of England?’.” Starting Points. Questions are there to be answered. I’ll start with the authorities. First, I’ll introduce Isidore of Seville, the patron saint of the Internet, who described “oratio” as threefold. Second, I’ll take up Willard van Orman Quine’s famous ontological slogan “no entity ithout identity” and use it as a lever. Using as a guiding question “When are two things one text?”, I will develop a pluralistic theory of text which will integrate a wide range of traditional notions of text. This theory will give us the means to describe the identity conditions of text. The Wheel of Text. In a rather free reading, Isidor distinguishes the three components “sense”, “expression” and “sign”. I relate Isidor’s components to the notions of text as meaning and intention (text-i), text as speech and linguistic utterance (text-l), and text as object and document (text-d). There are other notions of text, which fill the space between those concepts. We talk about the text as structure or ‘work’ (text-w), placed between text-i and text-l. We also talk about the text as fixed written version (text-v) between text-l and text-d. And we talk about the semiotic text as a picture and as a complex sign (text-s) between text-d and text-i. This concludes the wheel of text and constitutes a comprehensive theoretical model of “What text really is”. Practical implications. But what is such a theory good for? It has at least two fields of application. First, it has applications in the field of history and in analytical fields. The pluralistic model gives us a tool to describe and locate historical text technologies in relation to certain notions of text. All text technologies promote certain concepts of text while hindering others. This can be shown for oral tradition, manuscript culture and print; for electronic technologies like “plain text”, “WYSIWYG” or “markup”; for concepts like hypertext or the OHCO-model; for academic trends like the linguistic turn, pictorial turn or material philology; and even for the description of certain current cultural developments. In a second application, the pluralistic theory of text has consequences for the assessment and development of future text-technologies. How can markup languages be understood in the light of a pluralistic text model? How are epistemological and ontological questions in markup theory (like the foundational distinction between text and markup) to be answered? How can markup be used and maybe even conceptually extended to truly cover and support all notions of text? How can we develop text technologies beyond the markup paradigm to cope with notions of text constantly hindered by the concept of markup and the OHCO-model? Conclusion. How long is the coast of England? The answer lies in a closer examination of the question: “What do you mean by ‘coast’?”, “How close will you look at it?” and “Which instruments will you measure it with?”. The same holds true for the text. The answer lies in the eye and in the mind of the reader. What is text? - “Text is what you look at. And how you look at it.”