In 2002, Computers and the Humanities dedicated an issue to “Image-based Humanities Computing” at a time when “a majority of first generation image-based humanities computing projects have reached at least an initial plateau of completion.” (Kirschenbaum, p. 3) Since that time interest in incorporating primary source images into “text” editions has blossomed, as can be attested by recent threads on the TEI listserv and work on the TEI council to develop recommendations for specific methods for integrating image files – and pointers to areas of image files – into traditional text encoding projects. The number of image-based projects has multiplied in that time as well, although it takes some effort to find who is working on such projects. There is not (yet) a central listing of all image-based TEI projects under development.Practical work has been done on tool development since 2002 as well. As of March 1, 2007 there are no less than six tools of which I am aware that serve to edit or display images within the context of text editing. The majority of these tools are for linking text and image for digital display.Edition Production and Presentation Technology (EPPT), developed by Kevin Kiernan under the aegis of the Electronic Boethius project, Image processing services, developed by Neel Smith and Christopher Blackwell through Harvard's Center for Hellenic Studies, at Digital incunabula: a CHS site devoted to the cultivation of digital arts and letters, Juxta, developed through the NINES project (networked infrastructure for nineteenth-century electronic scholarship), Florian Thienel, “Konzept für einen editionsphilologischen EDV-Arbeitsplatz auf der Basis von XML und verwandten Standards” Diplomarbeit im Fach Informatik, Universität Würzburg Add to these additional tools for the simple annotation of imagesUVic Image Markup Tool (1.3.0.3),  and tools for tagging multimedia.Doug Reside at the Maryland Institute of Technology in the Humanities (MITH) at the University of Maryland is developing still-unnamed tool to tag not only images, but video and audio files as well Undoubtedly, the proliferation of tools focused on image editing and display reflects a growing interest in incorporating images into digital editions.The number of tools available for working with text plus image in digital editing highlights a simple truth: projects and their sources are different, and technologies that will work for one project might be incompatible with another. On the other hand, technologies applicable in simple circumstances might be expanded and combined with other technologies to suit much more complex situations. In this presentation, I will describe the sources of two digital projects with reference to their requirements for becoming viable digital projects. One is quite simple and the other complex, but the same methods inform both projects.MS Cambridge, Pembroke College MS 25, the subject of the Digital Edition of Cambridge, Pembroke College MS 25 , (Pembroke 25 project) directed by Paul Szarmach, Director of the Medieval Academy of America, and Thomas N. Hall at the University of Notre Dame. Pembroke 25 is a collection of Anglo-Latin homilies, copied at the scriptorium at Bury St. Edmunds in the late eleventh or early twelfth century by a scribe – or perhaps two scribes – who used the round English Caroline minuscule common there rather than the more pointed Norman Caroline minuscule that came to prominence in England in the period immediately following the Norman Conquest. Following the disillusionment of Bury St. Edmunds in 1538, Pembroke 25 disappeared for a time, but it was given to Pembroke College, Cambridge, at the end of the sixteenth century, and it still lives in that library today. It has been well maintained, it is not damaged, and the script is clear and easy to decipher.For an edition of this sort, a single text from a single manuscript, the encoding requirements are relatively simple. This manuscript is purely textual, not illustrated or illuminated in any way, but we are noting all abbreviations and distinctive paleographical aspects in the manuscript (including scribal emendations), as well as marginalia. The TEI Header contains some descriptive information, notably a descriptive list of all abbreviation types that are linked to the individual abbreviations throughout the project. We are using the EPPT for the text-image linking in this project, and I will give a brief demonstration of the project as it stands at the time of the conference.The Electronic Aelfric , directed by Aaron Kleist at Biola University and developed by a large group of collaborators, seeks to edit eight Old English homilies by Ælfric of Eynsham, who was arguably the most educated and prolific writer of tenth century England. These homilies cover the period from Easter to Pentecost, and trace their development through six phases of authorial revision and then through nearly 200 years of transmission following Ælfric’s death: twenty-four sets of readings or strands of textual tradition found in twenty-eight manuscripts produced in at least five scriptoria between 990 and 1200.The contrast between the Electronic Aelfric and Pembroke 25 is great: while Pembroke 25 is one manuscript, the Electronic Aelfric draws from twenty-eight manuscripts. Although no single homily out of the eight occurs in more than ten of these manuscripts, it is still a great number of textual variants to deal with. In addition to the text, the project also needs to address the individual manuscripts – six of which are from the infamous Cotton Collection (now housed in the British Library), damaged by fire in 1731. Those manuscripts that are not damaged still have singularities, such as marginalia, that we also wish to encode and link to image. We are using the EPPT for this project, partnered with the TEI Apparatus tags, to bring together the text and images of several different manuscripts. I will show examples of corresponding manuscript pages, as well as sample code illustrating multiple variants partnered with image-text linking.