A French linguist, P. Cotte, remarks that the verb be collocates with qualifying adjectives having a positive or negative connotation (i.e. be courageous, be cowardly) whereas the verb have is followed by nouns expressing a positive quality only (i.e. have courage vs. * have cowardice). This have + Noun construction is quite special in that it expresses a characterisation of the subject with nouns expressing modal qualities which are focalised. Contrary to the usual expression of possession (John has a car) in which the object refers to an entity different from the subject, these qualities are part and parcel of the subject. The verb have seems to introduce qualities which differentiate this subject from other subjects, and among them, the speaker. But it does not introduce his/her shortcomings most probably because of an empathy akin to that delineated by C. Boisson. The use of nouns preceded by a zero determiner to express the positive characteristics of the subject implies that these characteristics can be shared by people other than the subject. On the other hand, the verb be can somehow distance the speaker from the referent of the subject although it is said to express an identity between the subject and its complement. This is probably due to the fact that its history is linked to deixis. The use of adjectives to express the characteristics of the subject implies that these characteristics apply to the subject only, not to the speaker. The corpus linguist can use various corpora to verify this hypothesis even if research on these corpora cannot be fully automated. One needs to check each and every hit to eliminate constructions such as have diesel models (plural compound nouns), Sometimes she had to have water fetched from miles up in the mountain (causative constructions) and, less frequently, … the emotional strain ambulance men have day in, day out (time adverbials). Then one can make the proper calculations and use the appropriate statistical tools. First I counted how many occurrences of several relevant combinations of have + Noun (beauty, courage, intelligence, patience, tact and their opposites) or be + Adjective (beautiful, courageous, intelligent, patient, tactful and their opposites) there were in the British National Corpus. The χ² test nearly always showed a significant difference between the two constructions. To refine this result I compared the percentage observed for each construction expressing a negative characteristic with its theoretical percentage (variance test). The results always confirmed the hypothesis. But it was not the same with constructions expressing a positive characteristic: a majority of be + Adjective combinations proved to be more frequent than the corresponding have + Noun combinations. This shows that a corpus linguistics approach helps isolate the constructions that do not comply with the hypothesis, which is a first step towards finding an explanation to these exceptions. Moreover, as the research progresses, the concordance lists highlight new characteristics of the constructions under study, such as the [± animate] and [± human] features of the subject. Preliminary results tend to show that there are significantly more inanimate subjects with the verb be. Finally, we see that searching through different corpora (the BNC and the BNC Baby) with slightly different software programmes (SARA or XAIRA) enables the corpus linguist to give a more complete answer to the question raised. SARA does not answer queries about grammatical categories while XAIRA can. This, together with the fact that the BNC Baby is much smaller than the BNC, allows me to find out what qualities or shortcomings are more frequently expressed with the verbs be or have, something that would be almost impossible to do with the BNC. Preliminary results show that the typical qualities and shortcomings in which the theoretical linguist is interested do not appear so frequently in the qualities and shortcomings associated with the verbs be and have. Among the five most frequent quality nouns associated with have (experience, knowledge, confidence, responsibility, character), only one (character) is mentioned by the theoretical linguist. The situation is even worse if one considers the ten most frequent qualities or shortcomings associated with be, which are, in decreasing order: able, nice, careful, quiet, honest, difficult, good, bold, important, strong. None of those traits is mentioned by the theoretical linguist, although further research is necessary to confirm those findings. This ongoing study thus shows that a corpus linguist can consider the problem from a point of view which is quite different but complementary to that of the theoretical linguist: the latter is mainly interested in concepts; the former both in concepts and occurrences.